1 Chronicles 27

The House of God

1 - 15 5. The Commanders of the Army

The commanders of the army are not Levites. These are only those who perform the four services that we have seen before. Despite the rest that is there when David is king and has defeated his enemies, David keeps 24,000 soldiers on standby every month to ensure and maintain peace and security.

The commanders of the army mentioned here are also mentioned in 1 Chronicles 11 among the mighty men of David. They have shared with David his rejection and trial. Here they share in his glorification and reign; they are given the high function of commander of the army.

We are also rejected with the true David and as reward we will share in His glorification (2Tim 2:12a). Whoever is faithful in the spiritual battle in the small, is also faithful in the big and gets a greater responsibility. Mighty men are formed in heavy trials and can later openly go out for the Lord of the Lords. Every believer who already has a certain service in the public domain has taken his aptitude test in secret. No one gets a public service if he is not exercised in secret.

Those who are at the forefront of the battle, the commanders of the army, can say how the battle should be fought because they have been taught by the great commander, the “captain of the host of the LORD” (Jos 5:14). Young believers should pay attention to the elderly and wait for them to give the signal for battle.

16 - 24 6. The Princes of the Tribes of Israel

The princes of the twelve tribes can be applied to leaders the Lord gives in a local church. These are persons other than gatekeepers and commanders of the army. These leaders are in charge every day, when there is no talk of special situations. We might think of “gifts of … administrations” (1Cor 12:28).

At the end there is a special mention of the census (verses 23-24). From these verses we can learn that the people of God are always larger than we can count. David did not want to know the exact number of inhabitants, for then he would doubt God’s promise of countless offspring (Gen 15:5; 22:17). His sin was that he wanted to know the strength of his people and therefore had counted all “who drew the sword” (1Chr 21:2,5).

25 - 34 7. Other Overseers and Counselors

This section lists the blessings of the land and who were in charge of them. All these blessings are under the care of David. Of this he can feed others through his overseers. Also now there are ‘overseers’ who can distribute food to the church (Mt 24:45). Every fruit mentioned here has its own spiritual meaning, as does every animal.

Fighting is important, but it’s also a hard job. The same applies to the judge and gatekeeper. It also applies to the giving of food to God’s people. It is not always easy to be able to feed hungry hearts with the supplies our Lord holds. Yet that is more of a thankful work. It is more often received in gratitude.

The enumeration of the activities of the overseers shows a wide variety of activities. In the same way there is a great variety of gifts in the church. Those who have to do the work in the field cannot take care of the cattle at the same time. He neither has understanding of this. Yet there is unanimity in all this work, for everything happens for the sake of king David. No one should interfere in the work of another. Everyone must be faithful in his own service.

We can apply a lot of this to the church. What each one has been entrusted with remains the property of the great King, the Lord Jesus. What confusion arises when someone starts to consider the field he has to maintain as his own. This is what happens a lot in professing Christianity, for example when a minister speaks of ‘my church’ and treats it as such. Only the Lord Jesus can speak of “My church” (Mt 16:18).

“The king’s storehouses” (verse 25a) represent for us the treasures in heaven that we may collect (Mt 6:20). We can think of everything we possess in Christ, because in Him “are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge” (Col 2:3).

There are also the “the storehouses in the country, in the cities, in the villages and in the towers” (verse 25b). Joseph and Hezekiah have storehouses (Gen 41:49,56; 2Chr 31:5,7,10). These storehouses are used to distribute what has been collected. They are everywhere, in all kinds of areas and in all kinds of places. It points to the abundance of the land, in which all share, wherever they live.

“The storehouses in the country”, show the task that is done in the world. We can think of the preaching of the gospel, through which people come to conversion. “The cities” and “the villages” can be compared to large and small local churches, where people who have come to conversion are brought. “The towers” are lookouts to warn of the arrival of the enemy and provide protection from the enemy.

In “the agricultural workers” (verse 26) we can see a picture of the work of the evangelists. Just as David appoints someone over his workers, Paul indicates how to work in God’s field (1Cor 3:6-8). We also have to work with good seed, that is to say that the gospel must be preached pure, which means pure biblical.

The “charge of the vineyards” (verse 27) is reminiscent of the care of God by His servants. The Father wants His own to bear fruit for Him (Jn 15:1-2). It gives Him joy when there is fruit for Him, of which “the wine cellars” speak (Jdg 9:13).

By “the olive … trees” (verse 28) we can think of growth in the house of God (Psa 52:8a; 92:13). This growth happens through the working of God’s Spirit, of Whom the oil is a picture.

The “sycamore trees”, or fig-mulberry trees, are a picture of righteousness before God. When Adam and Eve have sinned, they make loin coverings of fig leaves (Gen 3:7). It were homemade coverings that could not cover their nakedness before God. Thus, a righteousness of its own cannot exist before God. If there is no fruit, the fig tree is cursed (Mk 11:12-14). The only righteousness that God accepts is righteousness based on faith. He Himself gives that righteousness on the basis of the work of His Son.

The “stores of oil” speak of “the Holy Spirit, whom He poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior” (Tit 3:5-6; 1Jn 2:20,27; Gal 5:22-23). The light of the Spirit is preserved for His people. Wherever it is needed unlimited use can be made of it. This oil never runs out.

The “cattle” (verse 29) serve to sacrifice to God. For us, that means spiritual sacrifice. When the prophet Hosea gives the people words to pronounce as a confession, he says: “That we may present the fruit of our lips [literally: our lips as bulls]” (Hos 14:2). Their pronounced confession is compared to the sacrificing of bulls. This indicates the awareness that God will accept their confession as a sacrifice, with in their hearts the respect that goes with it.

This sacrifice is brought in reality by the Lord Jesus. His sacrifice is great enough to forgive the greatest sin. The writer of the letter to the Hebrews quotes this verse from Hosea to encourage the believers to honor God: “Through Him then, let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that give thanks to His name [literally: confess His name]” (Heb 13:15). Did we store this fruit?

“The camels” (verse 30a) are burden bearers. The application to us comes in the exhortation: “Bear one another’s burdens” (Gal 6:2a). “The donkeys” (verse 30b) are also burden bearers, but in the application to us we see in it more the work in a local church and more of cooperation with others. “The flocks” (verse 31a) is reminiscent of the “little flock” (Lk 12:32) that depends on the Lord’s care.

“All these were overseers of the property which belonged to King David” (verse 31b). It should be remembered that the Lord Jesus, in His care, gave overseers and shepherds to pasture His flock. They are given the instruction: “Be on guard for yourselves and for all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the church of God which He purchased with His own blood” (Acts 20:28; cf. 1Pet 5:2).

Then seven men are mentioned who belong to the direct followers of David (verses 32-34). They are more fiduciaries than officials. The first one mentioned is “Jonathan, David’s uncle” (verse 32a). He is a counselor, a man of understanding with a task as scribe i.e. court writer. The second person is “Jehiel, the son of Hachmoni” (verse 32b) who tutors the king’s sons. He takes care of the king’s sons, a task that has to do with raising and guiding.

The third is “Ahithophel counselor to the king” (verse 33a). Of him, we know that because Absalom does not follow his advice, he commits suicide (2Sam 17:23). The fourth is “Husai, the Archite”, who is described as “the king’s friend” (verse 33b; 2Sam 15:37). He is a special fiduciary of the king (cf. 1Kgs 4:5).

After Ahithophel’s death, his position is taken over by “Jehoiada the son of Benaiah” (verse 34a), the fifth on the list. The sixth is “Abiathar” (verse 34b), the priest who manages to escape the slaughter in Nob and joins David (1Sam 22:20). Finally, the text mentions the well-known “commander of the king’s army” Joab (verse 34c).

“The counselor” (verses 32-33) is a person who can give advice. This should be done from a spiritual and Scriptural point of view and not from human wisdom. Sometimes these advices are also recorded in writing. The letter to the Philippians, the first and second letter to Timothy and the letter to Philemon can be considered as such ‘advice’ letters.
