Isaiah 62

The Holy of Israel

1 - 2 A New Name

Verses 1-6 connect directly to the previous chapter. The prophet, as type of Messiah and the faithful remnant, will not keep silent and not keep quiet for Zion’s sake until “her righteousness” and “her salvation” respectively “goes forth like brightness” and “like a torch that is burning” (verse 1). He cannot keep quiet as long as Zion is still oppressed. But when her righteousness and her salvation have come, a totally new situation for the people will have arisen, which has also been discussed in the previous chapter.

Zion or Jerusalem is the place God has chosen to make His Name dwell. Therefore, Christ will not keep quiet (cf. Rth 3:18) until Zion has become a capital for the nations, both religious and political (Psa 48:1b-2). Therefore, Christ will not keep silent, He will speak to God and intercede for the people, until He has brought the matter to an end, until all God’s promises, which are also in Him as far as Zion is concerned, are fulfilled (2Cor 1:20).

The nations will see Israel with a new name given to them by the LORD (verse 2). Now it is still so, that because of them the Name of God is blasphemed among the nations (Rom 2:24). That will change when Israel is God’s people again and has a new name. That new name of Israel reads: “the LORD is our righteousness” (Jer 33:16). That is how the nations will call Israel, while they will be amazed at the righteousness and splendor of this once destitute people. Kings who conquered the land and left behind devastation will admire the regained glory of that land.

However, “the LORD our righteousness” is also the Name of God Himself in the realm of peace (Jer 23:6). The LORD and Israel have the same name! That is because Jerusalem will soon be united with Him as the earthly bride of Christ. Then Israel, as God’s redeemed people, may also bear His Name.

3 What Zion Means to the LORD

The imagery describing of the condition of Zion in this verse is exceptionally beautiful. The city is “a crown of beauty” and “a royal diadem”. The “crown” is worn by a king. The “diadem” or “turban” is what the high priest wears (Exo 28:4,39; Zec 3:5). Crown and diadem are not seen here on the head, but the crown is “in the hand of the LORD” and the diadem is “in the hand of your God”. The second line of the verse says the same as the first line, but in other words. This strengthens the thought. The name “LORD” emphasizes that He is in a covenant relationship with His people. The fact that He is also called “your God” emphasizes that He is the only and omnipotent God of His people.

The crown and diadem are crown jewels in His hand. By this Scripture means that in His hand the people of Israel will show the characteristics of king (crown) and priest (diadem), just like the Lord Jesus Himself, Who as the true Melchizedek will be both King and Priest.

Two different Hebrew words for “hand” are used. The first word is the open hand, which indicates power, and the second word is the palm of the hand, which indicates that the hand shows something. Together they represent the intense joy of the heart of the LORD in revealing His grace and redeeming power. In this we may see the functions of royal authority and priesthood both united in Christ. Israel will share this dual capacity with Christ.

Many have tried, and the antichrist will try it as the last one (Rev 13:11), to exercise authority over both civil and religious life. But as has been already shown throughout the history of mankind, the last attempt of the antichrist will also fail (Eze 21:26). It is only in Christ that these two functions are perfectly connected and will be exercised by Him in a perfect way (Zec 6:13).

4 - 5 Zion Accepted Again

In the coming day Jerusalem will no longer be called “Forsaken” and the land will no longer be called “Desolate” (verse 4). The city will receive names that express the love of the heart of the LORD for her. She is called: “My delight is in her”, which is the translation of Hephzibah, the name of the wife of Hezekiah, the mother of Manasseh (2Kgs 21:1) and contemporary of Isaiah.

He also calls her “Married”. He has not been able to acknowledge her as such for some time because of her unfaithfulness (cf. Hos 1:9). When she has been converted, He will openly acknowledge again the marriage bond He has never broken (cf. Hos 2:19-20).

His love will be as strong and full as the love of a newlywed (verse 5). The thought in every part of this verse is that of the bridegroom acquiring an inalienable right ‘to have and to keep’.

6 - 7 Persistent Intercessory Prayer

In view of all this, the LORD has appointed watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem who intercede day and night with the LORD for the city. They call to Him in view of the sad state of Jerusalem until His purposes concerning His earthly people are fulfilled (verses 6-7). By appointing watchmen the LORD says as it were that He Himself has arranged the intercession. The watchmen symbolize those who pray for the peace of Jerusalem. With this they show once again that they are united with the LORD, united with Him in the search for the restoration of Israel (cf. verse 1).

That special intercession should be our ongoing activity in view of our situation as believers who also live in an end time amidst the ruins of the Christian testimony (1Pet 4:7). Just as they do not give Him rest, we should not do so, but continually appeal to Him in prayers for His people (cf. Lk 11:5-10; 18:1-8).

8 - 9 Jerusalem Will Never Be Abandoned Again

These verses give the answer to the prayers. The answer is definite, but He wants to use the intercession of His own for the fulfillment of His purpose. The Lord wants to be prayed to. Knowing the will of God does not make us passive, but rather brings us to the prayer that this will also will be carried out. God encourages believers through His Spirit to pray for things of Him that He has decided to give. This is praying in the Holy Spirit (Jude 1:20).

Here the LORD declares with an oath that the heathen powers will never again plunder the land (Isa 10:13-14) and rob the rightful owners of the results of their toil (verse 8). They will enjoy the harvest and praise the LORD for it (verse 9).

This reminds us in a powerful way that we will make a habit of thanking the Lord daily for everything He gives us in material prosperity in the form of food. Our thanksgiving before meals should never become a formality. It must come from a heart that is always aware of the goodness of God. The food we eat is “sanctified by means of the word of God and prayer” (1Tim 4:4-5).

Furthermore, those who have collected the wine in the coming day will “drink it in the courts of My sanctuary”. They will joyfully go to the house of the LORD with hearts filled with thankfulness.

10 Call to Go Out of Babylon

The continual ascent to the house of the LORD of the previous verse gets in this verse a vivid forecast in an order that is yet to be issued. To come into the house of God and see the Messiah His people will go through the gates of Jerusalem. The way there must be prepared, that is to say, cleared of obstacles (cf. Isa 40:3; 57:14). There will be a highway, a royal way, over which one will go to Israel. This also has a spiritual application, because any obstacle to a spiritual blessing will also be removed from the heart of Israel.

Under the standard of the Messiah, which means under His protection, they will travel through the lands of the peoples. Thus we have departed from spiritual Babylon under the standard of the gospel on our way to heavenly Jerusalem, while going through the world where deceptive stumbling blocks need to be removed that want to hinder our progress.

Anything that is a stumbling block, anything that impedes the enjoyment of free and continuous access to the throne of grace, anything that stands in the way of our fellowship with God, must be removed. Often there is a lot of clutter that needs to be cleared away, such as worldly connections and carnal desires.

11 - 12 The LORD Comes As Savior

These verses describe the fulfillment of the promises for Israel. The voice of the LORD will sound throughout the earth to announce that salvation for Zion has come (verse 11). Salvation here is a Person. He is coming! ‘Salvation’ is in Hebrew yasha, a word that comes back in the name Jesus. Jesus means ‘the LORD is salvation’. When He comes, He also comes with a reward for those who have been faithful to Him (Rev 22:12).

The nations will recognize Israel as “the holy people, the redeemed of the LORD” (verse 12). The city that was not sought by anyone, but despised, will be called “Sought out, a city not forsaken”. Many will go to that city to see her glory and beauty. They will see the wonders of God’s grace and power revealed in her. The city will be full of people and the streets will be filled with happy playing boys and girls (Zec 8:4-5).
