Leviticus 18

Come Near to God

Introduction

In this chapter we read a lot of what we also read in Leviticus 20. The distinction is that in this chapter God as the ”LORD” is in the foreground, while in Leviticus 20 the emphasis is on God’s holiness. There we read about the punishments for the sins that are necessarily given ample attention to here.

1 - 4 Do Not Do as Egypt or Canaan

1 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
2 “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘I am the LORD your God.
3 You shall not do what is done in the land of Egypt where you lived, nor are you to do what is done in the land of Canaan where I am bringing you; you shall not walk in their statutes.
4 You are to perform My judgments and keep My statutes, to live in accord with them; I am the LORD your God.

God puts Himself every time before the attention of the people as the LORD, the God of the covenant with His people. By doing so, He wants them to take on His features and not those of the nations around them. There is a special warning for the influence of Egypt and Canaan. After the laws with a view to their sacrificial service, the so-called ceremonial laws, God now gives some moral laws with a view to their sexual intercourse.

Egypt represents the world without God. In Egypt there is a lot of human wisdom (Acts 7:22). For the Christian, the danger of Egypt is discussed in the letter to the Colossians. It also warns against wisdom that takes people captive (Col 2:8). The Colossians are in danger of mixing their faith with the wisdom of the world. Paul reminds them that in Christ “are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge” (Col 2:3).

Canaan is the land of blessings that God has given His people. The great danger there is not so much wisdom, culture and science, but the great corruption that reigns there. The Christian is put in the heavenly places, of which Canaan is a picture. But that does not mean that there are no dangers. It is precisely in the letter to the Ephesians, where the blessings of the Christian are described, that strong warning is given for any form of corruption (Eph 4:17-19). Giving in to this corruption means that we will lose the blessings.

The Christian is a new creation, he has been created “in [the likeness of] God” (Eph 4:24). He received Christ (Col 2:6) and learned Christ (Eph 4:20). The danger is that we adapt to the world around us in its character of Egypt or in its character of Canaan. Then we no longer show the new, but the old man.

The great contrast we see here is the contrast between the statutes and judgments of the world in its various forms and the statutes and judgments of God. The following of the former means death, the keeping of the latter means life.

5 Do This and You Shall Live

5 So you shall keep My statutes and My judgments, by which a man may live if he does them; I am the LORD.

Here we read the motivation for keeping the commandments: to receive and enjoy life. This verse is quoted four times in the Old Testament: three times in the book of Ezekiel (Eze 20:11,13,21) and once in the book of Nehemiah (Neh 9:29). It is quoted three times in the New Testament (Lk 10:25-28, Rom 10:5; Gal 3:12).

The last two texts (Rom 10:5; Gal 3:12) show that no man has received the promised life. For there was no man who complied perfectly with the statutes and judgments of God. Only when one repents and receives new life from God on the basis of faith he can live to the glory of God and do His will wholeheartedly. The law says: Do this and you will live. The gospel says: Live and you will do.

6 - 16 Incest

6 ‘None of you shall approach any blood relative of his to uncover nakedness; I am the LORD.
7 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father, that is, the nakedness of your mother. She is your mother; you are not to uncover her nakedness.
8 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife; it is your father’s nakedness.
9 The nakedness of your sister, [either] your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter, whether born at home or born outside, their nakedness you shall not uncover.
10 The nakedness of your son’s daughter or your daughter’s daughter, their nakedness you shall not uncover; for their nakedness is yours.
11 The nakedness of your father’s wife’s daughter, born to your father, she is your sister, you shall not uncover her nakedness.
12 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s sister; she is your father’s blood relative.
13 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s blood relative.
14 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s brother; you shall not approach his wife, she is your aunt.
15 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife, you shall not uncover her nakedness.
16 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your brother’s wife; it is your brother’s nakedness.

The acts that are described in verses 6-23 are acts of incest. They run counter to God’s original purpose with marriage and sexuality. This should be self-evident to God’s people. You assume them in the world and not in the people of God. That God addresses all these warnings to His people shows how necessary it is, because His people are also capable of these sins. God shows evil in its most horrible forms. He knows better than man himself to what he can degrade.

God here forbids sexual intercourse between blood relatives. The Hebrew words for ‘nakedness’ and ‘uncover’ are euphemisms, that is, softened or covered terms, for sexual intercourse. Here it concerns illicit sexual intercourse or fornication (Eze 16:36; 23:18). Such relations are unnatural.

The prohibition starts with the general ban on sexual intercourse with a blood relative. Sexual intercourse is forbidden here with:

1. mother;

2. stepmother;

3. half-sister (same father or mother);

4. grandchild;

5. half-sister (from the father’s second marriage);

6. aunt, the sister of father or mother;

7. aunt, the wife of the father’s brother;

8. daughter-in-law;

9. sister-in-law.

17 - 20 Other Illicit Sexuality

17 You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and of her daughter, nor shall you take her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness; they are blood relatives. It is lewdness.
18 You shall not marry a woman in addition to her sister as a rival while she is alive, to uncover her nakedness.
19 ‘Also you shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness during her menstrual impurity.
20 You shall not have intercourse with your neighbor’s wife, to be defiled with her.

Forbidden is also the sexual intercourse with:

1. a woman and her daughter and a woman and her granddaughter;

2. a woman and her sister;

3. a woman who has her period;

4. a woman married to another person.

21 Prohibition to Offer Children

21 You shall not give any of your offspring to offer them to Molech, nor shall you profane the name of your God; I am the LORD.

The Molech is the national god of the Ammonites. In the context of the text, this does not seem to be primarily a fire offering, but an ordination of children to temple prostitution. It is a spiritual fornication that underlies carnal fornication.

22 Prohibition of Homosexual Intercourse

22 You shall not lie with a male as one lies with a female; it is an abomination.

Homosexual intercourse is the sin of Sodom (Gen 19:5), from which also the Israelites do not keep themselves free (Jdg 19:22). God gives people over to these degrading passions, when they honor the creature above the Creator (Rom 1:24-27).

23 Prohibition of Intercourse With an Animal

23 Also you shall not have intercourse with any animal to be defiled with it, nor shall any woman stand before an animal to mate with it; it is a perversion.

The prohibition of intercourse with an animal is given more often (Lev 20:15-16; Exo 22:19; Deu 27:21). The fact that this prohibition is also presented to the people of God shows that this horrible sin is also possible among God’s people.

From a spiritual point of view, an animal is a symbol for people who ignore the existence of God in an absolute way or reject Him absolutely. We see this attitude in the two beasts described in the book of Revelation (Rev 13:1-18). Where there is no longer any connection whatsoever with the living God, man sinks into the deepest corruption. To that the greatest conceivable shame is connected, of which he is not conscious through his total closing off for any revelation from God.

24 - 30 God Does Not Tolerate Abominations

24 ‘Do not defile yourselves by any of these things; for by all these the nations which I am casting out before you have become defiled.
25 For the land has become defiled, therefore I have brought its punishment upon it, so the land has spewed out its inhabitants.
26 But as for you, you are to keep My statutes and My judgments and shall not do any of these abominations, [neither] the native, nor the alien who sojourns among you
27 (for the men of the land who have been before you have done all these abominations, and the land has become defiled);
28 so that the land will not spew you out, should you defile it, as it has spewed out the nation which has been before you.
29 For whoever does any of these abominations, those persons who do [so] shall be cut off from among their people.
30 Thus you are to keep My charge, that you do not practice any of the abominable customs which have been practiced before you, so as not to defile yourselves with them; I am the LORD your God.’”

If Israel takes over the actions of the nations around them, they will be spewed out like those nations. Persons who surrender to such horrible acts as described above shall be cut off from among their people. God has given them His statutes and His judgments to keep them from doing these abominations.

When God gives a certain revelation, He wants this revelation to work fully through in man’s life, that man takes it into account in his practice. The purity of marriage is of the utmost importance. God begins His warnings therewith. Paul writes about this in the letter to the Colossians and the letter to the Ephesians.

The antidote to all the evils mentioned in this chapter is given in verse 30. By ‘taking in’ that, we are kept from the abominations found in the world, which connect with our flesh. This antidote is: remain in the Word of God.

The chapter concludes with the same statement about God as that with which it begins.
