Numbers 26

The Wilderness Journey

1 - 4 Command to Take a Census

1 Then it came about after the plague, that the LORD spoke to Moses and to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
2 “Take a census of all the congregation of the sons of Israel from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers’ households, whoever is able to go out to war in Israel.”
3 So Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,
4 “[Take a census of the people] from twenty years old and upward, as the LORD has commanded Moses.” Now the sons of Israel who came out of the land of Egypt [were]:

Moses numbers the people by command of the LORD. It is as it is in Numbers 1. It is a sin to number the people without explicit command of God. In this sin David is caught (1Chr 21:1-7). He wanted to know the power of his people, as if God is not his power.

The command to number is given “after the plague”. The plague of the previous chapter is the last great plague that struck the people as ‘wilderness people’. The wilderness journey is over. They are about to enter the land. The unfaithfulness of the previous chapter has shown that all wilderness experiences have not changed the heart of man. Nor has God’s righteousness changed, as He has shown through the plague.

Yet He has not destroyed all of them, but in grace has kept them alive. They can be numbered. But a new generation is numbered. At the same time, however, the new generation is linked to the generation that “came out of the land of Egypt”. Other persons make up the people, but they remain the same people.

The expression “after the plague” marks a turning point in the history of the book of Numbers. As said, a new generation is numbered. The great question that arises from this is: Will this new people serve God more faithfully than the people who died in the wilderness?

At the beginning of the journey the people are numbered (Num 1:1-5). It is a great encouragement to know that, before we begin our ‘wilderness journey’, God numbered us head by head. God knows every member of His people by name. In the wilderness each member has his own exercises, but each member may know that God will take care during the whole journey. The census here is the census at the end of the journey. None of those numbered in Numbers 1 is alive here, except Caleb and Joshua (verse 65). This means that a totally different people are numbered than in Numbers 1.

They are numbered because the land will be given to them (verse 53). The big difference between the two censuses is that the census of Numbers 1 is done in view of the upcoming wilderness journey, while the census here is done in view of the upcoming entry into the promised land to take possession of the heritage. Because there will be a battle to take possession of the inheritance, again “whoever is able to go out to war in Israel” is numbered.

In both cases, the census is a great encouragement. During the census, everyone personally stands before God. This gives each member the impression that God has personal attention for him. This awareness gives strength to the task ahead, both for the wilderness and for the land.

The census does not only take place for all those who are able to go out to war, but also “by their fathers’ households”, the latter being the most important one because this is mentioned first. In the wilderness, battle is necessary to survive. In the land, battle is needed to conquer the inheritance. Once that inheritance has been taken, God’s intention is that every family should enjoy the inheritance. The blessings of the land are particularly enjoyed as a family of God, that is, together with our brothers and sisters, on occasions that are given for it. God’s family consists of fathers, young men and little children (1Jn 2:12-18).

We may enjoy when we do personal Bible study, we may also enjoy as elderly or young people among each other. But according to God’s purpose, the most is enjoyed when the whole family comes together. The fact that the emphasis in the census is more on the families than on the militant men is also evident, for example, from verse 33, which also mentions women.

5 - 11 Reuben numbered

5 Reuben, Israel’s firstborn, the sons of Reuben: [of] Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family of the Palluites;
6 of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
7 These are the families of the Reubenites, and those who were numbered of them were 43,730.
8 The son of Pallu: Eliab.
9 The sons of Eliab: Nemuel and Dathan and Abiram. These are the Dathan and Abiram who were called by the congregation, who contended against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they contended against the LORD,
10 and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up along with Korah, when that company died, when the fire devoured 250 men, so that they became a warning.
11 The sons of Korah, however, did not die.

The census begins with Reuben, emphatically named “Israel’s firstborn”. The census comprises four generations (Gen 46:9). Among them Pallu is named in particular because from his family Dathan and Abiram originated. These names recall the terrible revolt of Korah, Dathan and Abiram (Num 16:1-35). We are once again told what the sin of the rebels was and the special judgment that struck them from God. It is stated that they “became a warning” (verse 10). They are a sign that warns against any form of pride and rebellion.

But here we also read that the “sons of Korah, however, did not die” (verse 11). The reason is not that they have shown a special faithfulness to the LORD. They belong to a doomy family. They were saved because God wanted to save them because they have not shown the spirit of their father. There is no other motive to discover than the grace of God. The sons of Korah have remained conscious of this grace also in next generations. We find expressions of this in several psalms (Psalms 42-49; 84; 85; 87; 88).

12 - 14 Simeon Numbered

12 The sons of Simeon according to their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;
13 of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
14 These are the families of the Simeonites, 22,200.

Simeon is the tribe with the greatest loss. This large loss may also have been caused by the plague of the previous chapter, in which Simeon is also severely indebted (Num 25:14). His number concerns five generations: “The sons of Simeon: Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman” (Gen 46:10).

15 - 18 Gad Numbered

15 The sons of Gad according to their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites;
16 of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri, the family of the Erites;
17 of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
18 These are the families of the sons of Gad according to those who were numbered of them, 40,500.

The census of Gad concerns seven generations: “The sons of Gad: Ziphion and Haggi, Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli” (Gen 46:16).

19 - 22 Judah Numbered

19 The sons of Judah [were] Er and Onan, but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
20 The sons of Judah according to their families were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.
21 The sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
22 These are the families of Judah according to those who were numbered of them, 76,500.

In Judah’s census, as in Reuben’s census, a dark event in the past is recalled: the death of Er and Onan (Gen 38:6-10). They died without descendants.

The census of Judah includes five generations: “The sons of Judah: Er and Onan and Shelah and Perez and Zerah (but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan)” (Gen 46:12).

23 - 25 Issachar Numbered

23 The sons of Issachar according to their families: [of] Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the Punites;
24 of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
25 These are the families of Issachar according to those who were numbered of them, 64,300.

The census of Issachar concerns four generations: “The sons of Issachar: Tola and Puvvah and Iob and Shimron” (Gen 46:13).

26 - 27 Zebulun Numbered

26 The sons of Zebulun according to their families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
27 These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those who were numbered of them, 60,500.

The census of Zebulun concerns three generations: “The sons of Zebulun: Sered and Elon and Jahleel” (Gen 46:14).

28 - 34 Manasseh Numbered

28 The sons of Joseph according to their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.
29 The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites; and Machir became the father of Gilead: of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.
30 These are the sons of Gilead: [of] Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites;
31 and [of] Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; and [of] Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;
32 and [of] Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; and [of] Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
33 Now Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but only daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah.
34 These are the families of Manasseh; and those who were numbered of them were 52,700.

The census of Joseph’s tribe is done by the numbering of his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. The census of Manasseh, Joseph’s firstborn son (Gen 41:51), includes eight generations. Manasseh has increased in number. That has to do with the daughters of Zelophehad (Num 27:1-11). They have a special interest in the inheritance. They are not among the numbered in Numbers 1. But here, in view of the land, they show their interest in the land. God appreciates this and numbers it. In Numbers 27 we see what inspires them.

35 - 37 Ephraim Numbered

35 These are the sons of Ephraim according to their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
36 These are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
37 These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those who were numbered of them, 32,500. These are the sons of Joseph according to their families.

The census of Ephraim, Joseph’s second son (Gen 41:52), includes four generations.

38 - 41 Benjamin Numbered

38 The sons of Benjamin according to their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;
39 of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
40 The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: [of Ard], the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
41 These are the sons of Benjamin according to their families; and those who were numbered of them were 45,600.

The census of Benjamin includes seven generations.

42 - 43 Dan Numbered

42 These are the sons of Dan according to their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan according to their families.
43 All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those who were numbered of them, were 64,400.

The census of Dan concerns one generation.

44 - 47 Asher Numbered

44 The sons of Asher according to their families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
46 The name of the daughter of Asher [was] Serah.
47 These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those who were numbered of them, 53,400.

The census of Asher includes five generations. A daughter is also mentioned.

48 - 50 Naphtali Numbered

48 The sons of Naphtali according to their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the Gunites;
49 of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
50 These are the families of Naphtali according to their families; and those who were numbered of them were 45,400.

The census of Naphtali includes four generations.

51 All Numbered Israelites

51 These are those who were numbered of the sons of Israel, 601,730.

In the wilderness more than 600,000 members of God’s people have perished. But the people still have more than 600,000 members, although a little less over them (Num 1:46). It is a great miracle of God and a proof of His grace, that despite all the plagues the people are hardly decreased in number.

52 - 56 The Size of the Inheritance

52 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
53 “Among these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
54 To the larger [group] you shall increase their inheritance, and to the smaller [group] you shall diminish their inheritance; each shall be given their inheritance according to those who were numbered of them.
55 But the land shall be divided by lot. They shall receive their inheritance according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
56 According to the selection by lot, their inheritance shall be divided between the larger and the smaller [groups].”

The size of the inheritance depends on the size of the family. Where because of unfaithfulness, as with Simeon, the family has become smaller, that also means a smaller inheritance, so less pleasure.

The family of God’s children is large. Yet the enjoyment of the inheritance is only experienced by those who are faithful in their life with the Lord. The more there are, the more the inheritance is enjoyed.

Enjoying the inheritance is done in a tribal context. Each family stays within the borders that the LORD has determined for each tribe. One application may be that at the place where we meet as a local church, we enjoy the heavenly blessings together.

A practical application is that we should not go to another local church because we like it more there. Such behavior indicates that we are not content with our own “inheritance” which has been given to us, the place where the Lord has placed us. It may also have to do with running away from certain responsibilities.

57 - 62 Levi Numbered

57 These are those who were numbered of the Levites according to their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
58 These are the families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. Kohath became the father of Amram.
59 The name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and she bore to Amram: Aaron and Moses and their sister Miriam.
60 To Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
61 But Nadab and Abihu died when they offered strange fire before the LORD.
62 Those who were numbered of them were 23,000, every male from a month old and upward, for they were not numbered among the sons of Israel since no inheritance was given to them among the sons of Israel.

The census of the privileged tribe of Levi also reminds us of the dark event at the beginning of their history as priests. The unfaithfulness of Nadab and Abihu is not concealed (verse 61; Lev 10:1-2).

63 - 65 Reminder of the First Census

63 These are those who were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
64 But among these there was not a man of those who were numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
65 For the LORD had said of them, “They shall surely die in the wilderness.” And not a man was left of them, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun.

Here the census in the wilderness of Sinai is recalled. None of that first census could be included in this new census, except Caleb and Joshua. God has fulfilled His word of judgment, just as He fulfils His word of blessing. God always does what He has said.
