1 Chronicles 7

The House of God

Introduction

In this chapter we have an almost complete overview of the other tribes. Only Dan and Zebulun are missing. These tribes probably did not make any work of the genealogies. This also applies to Naphtali, although he can mention a few names in any case.

1 - 5 Descendants of Issaschar

With three tribes it is mentioned that there are “mighty men of valor”. That is here with Issachar (verse 2), and then with Benjamin, three times (verses 7,9,11) and with Asher (verse 40). Among these mighty men, the name “Tola” stands out because in the book of Judges we read of a certain “Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar” (Jdg 10:1), who has “judged Israel twenty-three years” (Jdg 10:2).

There is also talk of “troops of the army for war” (verse 4). That there are so many of them is because there are many women and sons. The women contribute by giving birth to children.

6 - 12 Descendants of Benjamin

In the next chapter, a more detailed register of Benjamin’s descendants is given (1Chr 8:1-28). It is the introduction to the genealogy of the first king of Israel, Saul.

Benjamin’s armed forces are formed by the heads of their fathers’ households from different families (verses 7,9,11). They are “mighty men of valor” (verses 7,9,11).

13 Descendants of Naphtali

Of the tribe of Naphtali only the first fathers are mentioned. They are also mentioned among those who went with Jacob to Joseph in Egypt (cf. Gen 46:24).

14 - 19 Descendants of Manasseh

Zelophehad is particularly highlighted by mentioning that he has daughters (verse 15). His daughters are mentioned five times in the Scriptures (Num 26:33; 27:1-11; 36:3-12; Jos 17:3-6; 1Chr 7:15). In these mentions it is said that Zelophehad has no sons (Num 26:33a). This is precisely why the daughters ask for a property in the land. They do not want their father’s name to disappear from the generations. The LORD says of them: “The daughters of Zelophehad are right” (Num 27:7). Zelophehad and his daughters teach us that God’s power is perfected in weakness.

20 - 29 Descendants of Ephraim

Men of the Philistine Gath kill sons of Ephraim (verse 21). These men feel themselves the owners of the land, because they are the native people. They see the Israelites as intruders and do not care about what God has determined. They take over the cattle in ‘their’ land and kill its owners. In the next chapter, the inhabitants of the Philistine Gath are driven out by the Benjamites (1Chr 8:13).

In the men of Gath and their actions we see a picture of our sinful flesh. This is how we were born and is therefore also called ‘original sin’. At the birth of their children, parents give this power of the lusts of the flesh to their children.

If the lusts of the flesh are not kept in death, they will kill us and bring great grief upon us (verse 22). Then Beriah is born (verse 23). Beriah means ‘unfortunate’ and is associated with misfortune that had come upon his house, that is the house of Ephraim. We can ignore the ‘unfortunate’ lusts of the flesh if we walk through the Spirit: “Walk by the Spirit, and you will not carry out the desire of the flesh” (Gal 5:16).

In verse 24 a woman, Sheerah, is mentioned as builder of cities. Women have a large share in the building of the kingdom of God, which consists of families. They govern families, raise children and determine the atmosphere in the family. That the inspired chronicler mentions her may certainly be an encouragement to any woman who wants to help build the kingdom of God. Her efforts are noted by God.

Joshua, the son of Nun, here called Non (verse 27), is the man who was given by the LORD to His people as successor of Moses to bring them into the promised land.

30 - 40 Descendants of Asher

The descendants of Asher are “all” referred to as “heads of the fathers’ houses, choice and mighty men of valor, heads of the princes” (verse 40). So they are not just “mighty men of valor”, as it is written of the descendants of Issachar (verse 2) and of the descendants of Benjamin (verses 7,9,11). They rise above them. They are “choice and mighty men”, they are very brave and skillful men to whom others also look up.
