Isaiah 56

The Holy of Israel

Introduction

The opening words of this chapter are a repetition of the admonition in the previous chapter (Isa 55:6-7). The thoughts and ways of Israel are not those of the LORD (Isa 55:8). The precious promises that follow in that chapter are an exhortation for those living in sin to leave their ways and for the unrighteous to give up their thoughts.

In the previous chapter we heard the invitation – four times “come” – to receive the blessings of the new covenant. In the next two chapters, Isaiah 56-57, which is the final part of the second part, Isaiah 49-57, we can recognize the response to this invitation. First, in the pious nations who will be introduced into the kingdom of God, Isaiah 56:1-8, and second, in the wicked Israelites who will be banished from that same kingdom, Isaiah 56:9 to Isaiah 57:21. In these two groups we recognize the fulfillment of the words of the Lord Jesus to the centurion of Capernaum (Mt 8:11-12; 19:30).

1 - 2 Do Righteousness

Let them “preserve justice” and “do righteousness” (verse 1). Then they will be in accordance with the attributes and actions that apply to God’s kingdom. The reason why they should do this is twofold: the kingdom will soon become public in salvation as well as in righteousness. When they realize how near His salvation is and that His righteous acts are about to be revealed, they will be encouraged to persevere.

A special blessing is promised to him who keeps God’s commandment (verse 2). Of all God’s commandments, the sabbath commandment is mentioned here as an illustration of keeping God’s commandments. This is the best test of whether someone really wants to keep them. He who loves the LORD shall keep them. In addition, the sabbath is also a sign of the covenant (Eze 20:12) in connection with the new covenant. Keeping the sabbath reveals the mind of the heart that wants to do righteousness. It is open, not only to the Israelites, but to every “son of man” (verse 2), i.e. also to those from the nations.

Besides keeping from profaning the sabbath the LORD also speaks about keeping the hand from doing any evil. The hand speaks of deeds. He who lives internally (heart) and externally (hand) in accordance with God is “blessed”.

For us, the sabbath is the peace in Christ, which we can only enjoy if our hand does not do evil.

3 - 8 Foreigner and Eunuch

Verse 3 mentions the two kinds of people who are outside the promises of Israel. The first is “the foreigner”. This is the foreigner by origin but who has come to live in the land and knows the LORD. He has joined the Jewish people – such a person is called “proselyte” – and maintains the Jewish laws. There are such people in Babylon. The foreigner might think that the call to go back to the land of Israel does not apply to him.

But he need not fear that the LORD will separate him from His people and rob him of the privileges he has enjoyed. The “blessed” of verse 2 applies to all men, all mortals, who fulfill the conditions of verse 1. It is not his genealogy that is decisive, but the question whether he preserves justice and does righteousness as mentioned in verse 1.

The second is the “the eunuch”. The law forbids him, even though he is an Israelite, to become part of God’s people (Deu 23:1). He can think he cannot be part of it because he knows his own condition as eunuch. Just as a dry tree bears no fruit, a eunuch one cannot conceive offspring.

However, the LORD has an encouraging word for “the eunuchs” who cling to His covenant (verse 4). Their fears will prove to be unfounded. They are allowed to be in His house. He even gives them the promise of a memorial and a name that are better than that of sons and daughters (verse 5). Anyone who thinks he is only a second-rate believer, someone who thinks he is underprivileged, not in count, gets an extra encouragement here.

We may gratefully accept this encouragement and pass it on to others. Every member of His people is one for whom the Lord Jesus has given His life. Their name will never be eradicated, but will be known to God forever (cf. Rev 3:12). It is not about who they are originally, but what they have become in Him.

If they keep from profaning the sabbath (verse 6), God will bring them to His holy mountain and give them joy in His house of prayer (verse 7). He will destroy any barrier to fellowship. They will be a full part of the congregation of Israel. He will accept their burnt offerings and sacrifices on His altar, for His house will be called “a house of prayer for all the peoples” (cf. Mt 21:13). And He Who in the future brings together the dispersed, will still bring together more people (verse 8). The LORD will bring together these dispersed, the eunuchs, the scattered of Israel, the ten tribes, as well as the others, the nations.

This also applies to today. The gospel continues and every day many throughout the world come to repentance (Acts 2:47). They come to His house, the New Testament church of the living God. The church is also first and foremost a house of prayer (1Tim 2:1-2).

9 - 12 Judgment on the Wicked

With verse 9 begins a new section that continues through Isaiah 57. We are in a quite different atmosphere with a quite different tone. It is no longer about restoration, but about judgment. While the faithful nations and outcasts are being saved, judgment goes to the apostates in Israel, the followers of the antichrist. The beasts, that is the Assyrians under the leadership of the king of the North, are called upon to feast on the unbelieving part of the people of Israel (verse 9).

This is due to the attitude of their leaders, who are watchmen of the people and have the task to warn the people of danger. The safety of the people, however, is not at all their concern (cf. Jer 6:17). They are blind to it (verse 10). They think only of their own convenience and enjoyment. They dream, lie down, slumber and are blind to spiritual values and reality. It is from this attitude, as it were, that the call goes out to the beasts to come and devour them. The LORD never judges without showing the righteousness of judgment. He does so by revealing the moral condition of the people and their leaders.

These leaders only awaken from their own ease when they can indulge in pleasure-seeking, revels and drinking bouts (verse 11). They are dogs that fatten themselves to satisfy their lust for pleasure, but they cannot bark to warn the people. They are worthless shepherds. They go their own way, the way that gives them the most. If there is any thought of tomorrow, then only to revel even more (verse 12).

All those who have been given a responsibility by the Lord Jesus to take care of His flock as shepherds must guard against a gradual decrease in their obligations toward the flock. They must also guard against lording over the herd or seeking sordid gain (1Pet 5:2-3).

The situation outlined above also applies to today. Who still has the courage to take spiritual responsibility and to warn against the secularism of the church, against all kinds of modern idols such as psychology, the prosperity gospel, cultic fashion, for wolves in sheep’s clothing who spread error under the cover of Christendom? Who still warns the young people in the church against the charismatic errors of our time, such as speaking in tongues, visions and so-called prophetic messages? On the other hand, there must be a call to study God’s Word for themselves in order not to fall prey to every wind of doctrine.
