Psalms 93

The Praise

Introduction

Psalm 93 can be seen as the first psalm in a series of psalms (Psalms 93-101) that describe and sing of the kingship of the LORD, Yahweh, that is, the Lord Jesus. At the same time, Psalm 93 is also a continuation of the previous psalms. It is the fulfillment of the promises of the LORD as promised in Psalm 92.

The LORD is now King. In Psalm 93, the faithful remnant sings of the consequences of God’s action in favor of His people. We also see this in Psalms 96, 97 and 99. In the new series of psalms, beginning with Psalm 94, we get a look back at the trials the remnant went through.

1 - 4 The LORD Reigns

The psalm begins with the statement that “the LORD reigns” (verse 1). Literally it says “the LORD is King”. This is what the people of God who were redeemed after the great tribulation profess (cf. Exo 15:18). That the LORD reigns means that the Messiah reigns. He has taken His place as King in Jerusalem. He is the Immanuel, the God with us. The Messiah is none other than the LORD, Yahweh, Who has been given government by God because He is the Son of Man (Jn 5:22,27).

The LORD has always been King (Exo 15:18). Yet Israel preferred to choose a man as king (1Sam 12:12). In the near future, a man, the antichrist, according to the election of apostate Israel, will be king over Israel. In Psalm 93, the Lord Jesus has taken His rightful place as King (Isa 52:7). Its announcement is repeated among the nations in Psalms 96, 97 and 99 (Psa 96:10; 97:1; 99:1).

When the Lord Jesus appears in the world the second time (Heb 9:28), it is to reign openly. He also rules now, but in secret, not openly visible to the world. To His own it is visible, namely in faith. His second appearance will be in no way like His first appearance. The first time He appeared as a Baby, wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger. We can also think of the moment when He presents Himself as the rightful King to Israel, on Palm Sunday, seated on the colt of a donkey, the young of a donkey (Zec 9:9). At His second appearance, He will come on the clouds of heaven and be “clothed … with strength”. Clothing is part of a person’s being; it shows others who a person is inwardly.

He comes in the clothing appropriate for the occasion. The Messiah “has clothed and girded Himself with strength”. He has not girded Himself with all kinds of weapons, but “with strength” given to Him (cf. Mt 28:18). This goes far beyond all kinds of means by which He defeats enemies. What He is clothed with figuratively pictures His power and majesty. He appears as King of kings and Lord of lords. ‘Girded’ is a military expression (Isa 8:9), in other words, the power with which the Lord Jesus is girded He uses to nullify enemies.

His power is His ability by which He as Creator created all things (Rev 4:11) and carries all things according to the purpose He has for all that He created (Heb 1:3). In this no one can oppose Him. It has seemed that way for a while, but that has been only appearance. Now He is going to carry out His plan, for He is also the Redeemer (Rev 5:1-14). As Creator and Redeemer, He is the rightful Owner.

The world “is firmly established, it will not be moved”, for He is in power (Psa 96:10). All the political, economic and spiritual powers that have caused the world to totter have been removed by judgment. Their power is gone forever. Now He rules forever. He does so according to God’s original ordinances, as He established them at creation (Psa 24:1-2). Therefore, the world stands unshaken (Psa 104:5).

The throne on which He sits, from which He now exercises His power openly, is not new (verse 2). It is a throne which “is established from of old”. He is “from everlasting”. Therefore, His power is from eternity. After all, there is no time imaginable when He has not been powerful. His throne stands unshaken from of old, no matter what men and nations on earth may do or think. There is no evil that can ever approach or affect that throne. A throne established from of old refers to it as a kingdom destined from the foundation of the world (Mt 13:35).

“The floods” (verse 3) with their powerfully flowing waters are symbols of power systems that determine the thinking and life of human society. Prophetically they are a reference to great powers like Assyria (Isa 8:7-10) with its Euphrates, powers that can only be broken down by the LORD Himself, the Immanuel. They are influences that “lift up” themselves against God. They “lift up their voice”, indicating that they make themselves heard emphatically.

With their compelling, pernicious teachings, they drown society. They “lift up their pounding waves”. This indicates that they pump their teachings into society with power and violence. We see this in our time in the systematic destruction of marriage and family instituted by God and the difference between man and woman established by God in creation.

The believer responds to this with peace and assurance: “The LORD on high is mighty”, mightier “than the sounds of many waters, [than] the mighty breakers of the sea” (verse 4). He is untouchable by the mighty nations. The mighty waters of the sea with its mighty waves are a picture of the peoples, the nations (Isa 17:12; Rev 17:15). They feel powerful and fizzle in rebellious pride which is symbolically represented in “the mighty breakers” (Psa 2:1-3; Job 38:11). God will answer all this pride with mocking laughter and scathing judgment by sending His Son, the Messiah (Psa 2:4-9; cf. Isa 8:7-10).

5 Holiness Is an Ornament

The exalted action of God above the nations, the majesty with which He is clothed, and the power with which He is girded, prove that His “testimonies are fully confirmed” (cf. Psa 19:7b). His testimonies include everything to which He has given testimony. They are all the statements that God has made through His word and through His prophets. It involves everything about Himself, about man, and what He has promised.

His testimonies are His words and therefore “fully confirmed” (cf. 1Tim 1:15; 3:1; 4:9; 2Tim 2:11; Tit 1:9; 3:8; Rev 21:5; 22:6). Faith rests on this. Faith trusts in the Word of God as in God Himself, not only for the final victory, but also for the way to it.

His testimonies are embedded in His holiness. They focus the heart of the believer on God. The standard of holiness is found in His house, where He dwells and where everything responds to His holiness. His house on earth is the great result of His work of redemption. God did not dwell with Adam or with faithful individual believers. He dwells with a redeemed people (Exo 29:45-46). This is God’s testimony of holiness on earth.

It is an ornament of His house, for there is nothing of sin or injustice present, defiling it (cf. Eze 43:12). Whatever is not holy does not belong to Him (cf. Rev 21:27). Nor will this ever change, just as He never changes. This ornament of holiness remains “forevermore”. Everything that belongs to Him bears this mark of holiness. It is sanctified by and for Him, dedicated to Him.
