1 Chronicles 5

The House of God

Introduction

The three tribes, whose descendants are mentioned in this chapter, Reuben, Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, live in the wilderness side of the Jordan.

1 - 10 Descendants of Reuben

Reuben lost his birthright by an act of fornication (verses 1-2; Gen 35:22; 49:3-4). That birthright went to Joseph. God’s choice goes beyond the natural. But Judah gets the most important place because through him the royal line runs and from his descendants the Leader, the Lord Jesus, will be born.

Reuben has enlarged his area (verses 9-10). He was given permission to stay on the east side of the Jordan and was not compelled to live in the land (Num 32:1-5,33). He wanted to stay on the east side of the Jordan because of his many cattle. It is the side that speaks of the earthly blessings.

What Reuben does present to us is the man who would like to possess more of the earthly blessings. For the Christian, it is dangerous to engage in the accumulation of earthly possessions as an end in itself. He will thereby pierce himself with many griefs (1Tim 6:9-10,17-19).

11 - 22 Descendants of Gad

Gad is a tribe where prayer plays a role (verse 20). Just like Jabez, the Gadites are also answered. In a joint war of the tribes on the east side of the Jordan against the Hagrites they cry out to God. By this they overcome, and not by their defensibility and skill in battle (verse 18). This war was not waged for their own benefit, but for God, it was a “war of God” (verse 22). Although that was the case, they had to fight themselves. Their crying to God is mentioned and shows that God remembers the moments when these tribes also showed their dependence on Him.

23 - 26 Descendants of the Half-Tribe of Manasseh

The half-tribe of Manasseh answers the blessing of God, which has been shown by a great number of descendants, with unfaithfulness to Him. Their unfaithfulness also has consequences for the other two tribes – who certainly also did not remain faithful, but that is not mentioned here – because they are carried away into exile together with the half-tribe of Manasseh by the king of Assyria. The carrying away into exile is mentioned several times in this chapter (verses 6,22,26).
