Psalms 144

The Praise

Introduction

Psalm 144 is a song of thanksgiving and praise (verses 1,2,9-15) in response to a tremendous redemption, with David (verses 1,10) being a type of the remnant.

The prayers of the remnant in Psalms 140-143 have been answered. The armies of the enemy have been destroyed. The enemy is described in this psalm as “aliens” (verses 7,11) who threaten to flood the promised land like a tsunami of great waters (verse 7). The LORD will nullify the threat by Himself destroying the hostile armies.

1 - 4 God's Power and Weak Man

For “[A Psalm] of David” (verse 1a) see at Psalm 3:1.

Verses 1b-2 are a title and a summary of the content of this psalm. David begins not with a prayer, like the previous psalms, but with a song of praise (verse 1b). He blesses or praises the LORD as “my rock” (Psa 18:46). Therefore, he is unshakable in battle. The LORD also teaches his hands to fight (cf. Psa 18:34). Therefore, he is effective in battle. The LORD teaches his fingers to wage war. Therefore, he knows how to approach the enemy to overcome him.

David has been a warrior from his youth. He fought in the Name of God (1Sam 17:45-47). He did not go into battle without first asking God’s will (1Chr 14:10,14). Thus, he was taught by the LORD to fight and wage war. That is the secret of all his victories.

We too have a battle to fight, and it is a spiritual struggle (Phil 4:3; Col 4:12; Jude 1:3). God wants to teach us how to fight. He gives the rules for this in His Word, for He wants us to fight in a lawful way (2Tim 2:5). Only when we fight like that does He give His reward. He gives us His armor, which enables us to resist the enemy and stand firm (Eph 6:10-18).

The LORD’s teaching in battle and in war David sees as an expression of God’s lovingkindness (verse 2). Israel’s deliverance through victory over the enemy is here an expression of God’s lovingkindness, God’s faithfulness to His covenant and promise. The various pictures speak of keeping, of support, and of redemption.

Through the LORD’s teaching, David knows how to fight. At the same time, he remains aware that he needs God’s protection. God is therefore to him his “fortress”, his “stronghold” (cf. Psa 18:2). From that shelter he can attack the enemy. In doing so, he counts on the LORD as “my deliverer”. He does not attribute any victory to himself.

God is his shield behind which he takes shelter. What arrow or sword can then do him any harm? The enemy would first have to eliminate God. And since that is impossible, David is completely invulnerable to any weapon of the enemy. God is his refuge and therefore he is perfectly safe from the enemy.

David did not take the law into his own hands, but placed it in the hand of the LORD. Therefore, he can say of the LORD: “Who subdues my people under me.” It can also, and probably better, be translated with: “Who subdues peoples to me” (cf. Psa 18:47). This is more consistent with the interpretation of this psalm.

That thought is wondrous in his eyes. So he says to the LORD: “O LORD, what is man, that You take knowledge of him?” (verse 3). Man, David himself, is so insignificant, and yet God takes knowledge of him. He cannot understand that God subjects peoples to him, yet he is no more than a man, a mortal, a void, impermanent man (cf. Psa 8:4).

The parallel with Psalm 8 makes it clear that the King here is also the Son of Man, Who will rule over all creation (Psa 8:7; cf. Dan 7:13). To this end, all enemies must be made a footstool for His feet (Psa 110:1).

David says it even more strongly in verse 4 than in verse 3 when he compares man to a sigh, a breath (Psa 39:5). You don’t see a breath. When it is cold, you see vapor, but only for a moment and it has disappeared invisibly, leaving no trace (Jam 4:13-14). A shadow is equally elusive and quickly passing (Job 8:9; Psa 102:11; Ecc 6:12). To a shadow there is no hold.

5 - 8 Prayer for God’s Intervention

Realizing his own utter powerlessness and futility, he asks the LORD to act against his enemies (verse 5). He asks Him to bow His heavens, that is, to leave His dwelling place, and come down. Then He must touch the mountains, that they may smoke (Psa 104:32b). This impressive natural phenomenon shows that the LORD has descended.

David learned from the LORD how to fight and wage war (verse 1). In fact, it means that he has insight into how the LORD fights. He now uses this insight to suggest to the LORD how He should fight the enemy (verse 6). He asks the LORD to flash forth His lightning and scatter the enemy. When He shoots His arrows, His lightning (Psa 18:14), He will confuse them.

While the enemy is in confusion, the LORD is able to stretch forth His hands from on high and deliver Him (verse 7). Deliverance occurs by rescuing him “out of great waters, out of the hand of aliens” (cf. Rev 12:15). Great waters speak of great tribulation by the nations (Isa 8:7). The hand of aliens speaks of people who assert right to God’s land but have no connection to God. These people speak a language unintelligible to the Jews (cf. Isa 28:11; 33:19).

What characterizes these strangers is a mouth that speaks deceit (verse 8; cf. Dan 11:23). There is nothing upright in their speaking. They are untrustworthy, treacherous in what they say. In addition, their “right hand is a right hand of falsehood”. This hand is contrasted with the hand trained by the LORD in verse 1.

With the right hand, powerful deeds are done (Psa 118:15-16) and oaths are sworn to (Isa 62:8). However, there is nothing upright in all their powerful acts and in all their powerful oaths they have sworn. What they say is not honest, but false. What they do or promise to do is diametrically opposed to the truth, it is mere deceit.

9 - 11 A New Song for a New Beginning

A new deliverance, ushering in a new age, calls for a new song (verse 9; Psa 33:3). In view of God’s forthcoming intervention to deliver him, David says he will sing a new song to God. He will use “a harp of ten strings” and sing praises to Him.

The first song is sung by God’s people in Exodus 15, after their deliverance from Egypt and the complete extermination of Pharaoh and his army (Exo 15:1). Here in Psalm 144 they sing a new song after all enemies have been defeated. In the Old Testament, there is mention of “a new song” seven times (Psa 33:3; 40:3; 96:1; 98:1; 144:9; 149:1; Isa 42:10). The New Testament mentions it twice: in Revelation 5 the new song is sung by the twenty-four elders (Rev 5:9) and in Revelation 14 by the faithful remnant of the two tribes (Rev 14:3).

God is the great Savior or Victor (verse 10). Kings seem to be the most powerful people on earth. When they are saved or are victorious, they may well think that they owe a salvation or a victory to their strength or cleverness. The reality is that salvation or victory comes from God, He “gives” it.

David is deeply aware of this. He is king, but he does not call himself that here. He speaks of “David His servant”. Nor does he speak of salvation or victory, but of rescue “from the evil sword”. By this he acknowledges that he is totally dependent on God. He has no power but only the power God has given him. There is no hope of deliverance but only in God.

Using the same words he used earlier in the psalm, David once again asks for rescue and deliverance out of the hand of aliens (verse 11; verses 7b-8). Last time, his request for deliverance was followed by a new song (verse 9). Here he attaches to his request for deliverance blessings for God’s people. He describes those blessings in the following verses.

12 - 15 Blessing for God’s People

David longs for deliverance from battle and war to establish a peaceful society. What happens to the women, children, livestock and possessions during the absence of the men who go to war? These questions occupy minds in wartime and make one long for a time of peace. David sees it in his mind. He lists in verses 12-14 a number of blessings that characterize a time of peace (cf. Deu 28:3-8). This is the new song he spoke of in verse 9.

All these blessings will be the portion of Israel during the millennial realm of peace. A foretaste of them will be enjoyed during the reign of Solomon, the son of David, who is a picture of the great Son of David, the Lord Jesus. Israel will then be the most powerful nation on earth. Men then will be at home managing their houses.

The first and great blessing is that of a happy family life. This can be seen in the prosperity of the sons and daughters. There is also social prosperity. This can be seen in the garners and the flocks. Added to this is the fact that all this will take place in freedom. It is the picture of perfect happiness enjoyed in undisturbed peace.

1. When there is peace, “our sons”, the sons of the people, will not be called away for war to endure hardship in the field or even to perish (verse 12). On the contrary, they will be at home “in their youth” and “be as grown-up plants”. By high grown plants we can think of cedars and palm trees. There they are “the planting of the LORD, that He may be glorified” (Isa 61:3; cf. Psa 128:3; Mt 15:13).

2. The next blessing is that “our daughters” are “as corner pillars fashioned as for a palace”. Here we are talking about a home. Corner pillars are important in a building. They give strength to the house. They are also beautiful, being “fashioned” like decorated pillars of a palace. This indicates the great value of the daughters of God’s people.

3. Next, “our garners be full, furnishing every kind of produce” (verse 13). Literally “from one kind to another kind”. It means not only a great quantity, but also a great variety. The supply of food will be so great and diverse that there will be an abundance of food in a variety of tastes for both man and beast.

4. “Our flocks” are very fruitful, they “bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields”. The flocks of sheep are large and will continually increase. The fields contain abundant green grass for the flocks which keeps the animals healthy. The flocks are there in the first place to offer sacrifices to God. Furthermore, they may also be eaten.

5. In addition to the flocks of sheep, there are also cattle or oxen. Of these, David says that “our cattle bear” (verse 14). This is because of the abundant harvest. Cattle are draught animals and load carriers. This indicates that in a time of peace there will be much service work, all to the glory of God (cf. 1Cor 9:9).

6. Security is also fine: there is no “mishap” or “loss”. “Without mishap” is literally “without breach”, meaning no breach in the defensive walls. There are no breaches in the wall, through which the enemy could enter. “Loss” is literally “outbreak” or “disaster”. The cities are safe places to live.

7. The final blessing is that there is “no outcry in our streets”. Because the cities are safe dwelling places, there is nothing that causes wailing. Within the cities there is peace according to the established order and rules. Everyone respects the rights of the other. There are no neighborly quarrels. Everyone is also healthy. There is no cause for wailing in the squares of the city.

The people who have experienced the LORD’s salvation, protection and blessing are a happy people in two respects (verse 15). First, this people fares as described in the previous verses, with happy families and great material prosperity. David is an example of the LORD’s salvation, protection and blessing. His wish is that this may also be the case with the remnant.

Secondly and more importantly, this people belongs to the LORD, Who is their God (Psa 33:12). He is the God Who made a covenant with them. On that basis He has bestowed upon them all these blessings. As a result, these blessings cannot be taken from them and they will possess them forever. He is the source of all happiness. To possess Him is to possess everything, without any possibility of ever losing any of it.
