Proverbs 16

The Signpost

1 - 5 The LORD Is Sovereign

Verse 1 indicates that the LORD is above “the plans of the heart” of a “man”. The word “but” at the beginning of the second line of verse assumes a contrast with the first line of verse. The first line of verse is about man and the plans he has in his heart. In the second line of verse it is about “the LORD” Who makes “the answer of the tongue” come from man. That “the LORD” (Yahweh) is spoken of here and in the following verses shows that the emphasis is on God’s relationship with man.

Man can and may have plans in his heart. The word “plans” has to do with setting up a plan in regular order with the goal of carrying it out that way. But when it is about execution, it is important to realize that God has the last word. He decides its execution, and it may well be different from what man had imagined. It is about recognizing God in carrying out the plans a man makes.

It is a general proverb that applies to every human being, believer and unbeliever. An unbeliever does not acknowledge God or involve Him in his plans and their execution. Yet even here God has the last word. An example of this is Bileam. He had plans in his heart to curse God’s people, but God ordered him to speak blessings over His people (Numbers 23-24).

Verse 2 indicates that the LORD is above man’s “ways”. By “ways” is meant the totality of his ways, his whole conduct and walk, everything he says and does. When man judges himself, when he looks at himself with his own eyes, he finds that he is “clean”. He sees no uncleanness in his motives. But because he judges himself, he cannot be objective. Lack of self-knowledge and the high probability of self-deception make his self-assessment unreliable. The proverb assumes that such a premature opinion of himself is at best naive and at worst complacent.

But the LORD fathoms the behavior and knows its motives. He tests or tests the minds through which a person comes to self-judgment. In His light, it may become apparent that a person is far from clean in his motives. When God says: “Man looks at the outward appearance, but the LORD looks at the heart” (1Sam 16:7), this is true not only when we look at others, but also when we look at ourselves. Testing the spirits is more than just testing the motives. God also sees the mind in which a person speaks and works. Is there obedience or rebellion?

The conclusion is that we easily deceive ourselves and therefore are unable to fully evaluate ourselves. Only God comes to a perfect, all-pervading appraisal. Rational explanations and self-justification are peculiar to the nature of fallen man. But God sees through the smokescreen of these and knows what drives a person inwardly.

We can see the speck in our brother’s eye and at the same time be blind to the log in our own eye (Mt 7:3). We are blind to our own mistakes and think we are absolutely right. But the Lord knows us completely. When all is well, we are aware of nothing and at the same time we know that we are not justified by this, because the knowledge of ourselves is very limited. Therefore, it is good to leave the final judgment of ourselves and our service to the Lord (1Cor 4:4-5).

Verse 3 indicates that the LORD is above the “works” of man. For our plans to succeed, we must depend on God. Therefore, we must commit our works, what we plan to do, to Him. The verb “commit” is literally “to roll”. The picture is that of rolling burdens. It implies that we cast off the care of the work, the project and its execution, like a stone from ourselves and roll it toward God, thus entrusting that care to Him (cf. Psa 22:8 [literally: rolled]; Psa 37:5; cf. Psa 55:22). We do this by laying what concerns us in prayer before Him.

When we do that, our plans will be established, that is, carried out, come to fruition. It shows complete dependence on God. The success or failure of our plans does not depend on chance events or adversaries, but on God. Therefore, we must commit our works to Him. Committing means that we cast everything upon Him and leave it with Him (1Pet 5:7). It is a one-time thing. It is good to begin the day by entrusting ourselves to Him for everything that will occupy us that day, planned or unplanned.

Verse 4 says that the LORD is above all His works, including the wicked. Everything He has made is part of His plan. Nothing exists by accident; there are no ‘loose ends’ in His world. He is at the beginning of everything and made everything with a purpose. Everything there is fulfills His purpose. That purpose is His glorification (Col 1:16). All His works will praise Him (Psa 145:10).

The same is true for the wicked. If he ends up in judgment, it is because it suits his life. That is how God has ordained it. We must not draw the wrong conclusion from this that God would be the Author of evil. God cannot sin and does not tempt anyone to sin (Jam 1:13-15). From Him come only good things (Jam 1:16-18).

God made man good (Gen 1:27,31), but man began to behave wickedly (Ecc 7:29). God calls the wicked to repent (Acts 17:30), for He has no pleasure in the death of the sinner (Eze 33:11). But if the latter does not repent before the day of judgment, he will perish in that day. The wicked and the day of doom belong together.

Ungodly people have not honored God in their lives. They will be forced to do so in judgment (Phil 2:10-11). The wicked are not made to live wickedly and die wickedly. There is no being chosen to be rejected. The Lord Jesus says of Judas Iscariot that it would have been good for him “if he had not been born” (Mt 26:25a). Judas is fully responsible for the choice he made to betray and deliver up the Lord Jesus for payment. At the same time, God knew how to use him to carry out His plan.

Everything has a purpose. The existence of the wicked seems to mock that purpose. Therefore, it is clearly stated here that “the wicked” was made “for the day of judgment”. The wicked focuses on the purpose assigned to him by God because of his wickedness. The judgment of the wicked – in which we can think especially, but not exclusively, of the antichrist, the man of sin – also shows God’s exaltation above all that He has made.

Verse 5 says that the LORD is above “everyone who is proud in heart”. The wicked of verse 4b has followers: everyone who is proud in heart. “Proud” describes the arrogance of those who are presumptuous against God (2Chr 26:16; cf. Psa 131:1). It is not just the proud glance, but the pride in the heart by which a person exalts himself above everything and everyone. Pride is the hallmark of satan and the antichrist and all their followers. Because pride disputes the exaltation that God has above all and because the proud person wants to take that place himself, this sin is an abomination to Him. It is the sin of satan and man.

God will avenge that sin. That is absolutely certain, “assuredly”. These arrogant people will not go unpunished as innocents. God will humble all who are arrogant and proud (Isa 2:11-12).

6 - 9 To Live Under the Sovereignty of God

In verse 6, it is about complete deliverance from sin, what brought about that deliverance, and what is the practical consequence. The first line of verse speaks of the atonement of iniquity. The second line of verse speaks of keeping away from evil.

“Lovingkindness and truth” are characteristics of God. They become particularly evident on the cross (Psa 85:10). God, through the cross work of His Son Jesus Christ, worked atonement for everyone who believes. His lovingkindness speaks of Him being full of goodness and love for man. He has shown this in the gift of His Son.

His faithfulness has to do with His faithfulness to the truth. He cannot ignore sin without question. Sin must be judged. He has done that in the judgment He brought upon His Son. His faithfulness to the truth also includes reconciling to Himself each one who accepts the sacrifice He has brought in Christ.

Whoever shares in the atonement of his iniquities is delivered from the power of sin. In his life it will be seen that he no longer serves sin and that he keeps away from evil. He cannot do this in his own strength. The impetus for this lies in “the fear of the LORD”. Out of love and reverence for God, he will no longer want to have anything to do with evil, with sin, in order to live only to the glory of God (Tit 2:11-12).

“When a man’s ways are pleasing to the LORD”, it is because they remind Him of the ways the Lord Jesus went on earth in which He had perfect pleasure (verse 7). Those ways initially evoke hatred on the part of the world and not peace. Yet enemies will acknowledge the benefit of such a way and seek friendship with him because of that benefit.

A lifestyle that pleases God disarms social hostility. The life that pleases God is a life lived by faith (Heb 11:6). It will be blameless and find grace with others. God can bring about that. It is not about all enmity from all enemies, but in certain situations, where He wants it. A person can be charged by enemies and thrown into prison. In prison, God can work the hearts of fellow prisoners to accept and appreciate the believer. Joseph experienced this.

We must remember that this proverb should not be declared valid for all situations. Another rule, which is equally valid, is that believers have tribulation in the world (Jn 16:33), just as “all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus” will be persecuted (2Tim 3:12).

The few possessions a person has, but obtained in a righteous manner, are better than “great income” obtained in an unfair manner, “with injustice”, without being entitled to it (verse 8). “Little” does not necessarily mean extreme poverty; it could refer to a modest income. It is about what gives satisfaction in life, and that is God’s approval and fellowship with Him. God abhors dishonestly obtained income.

What is obtained dishonestly is also not used well. What is honestly earned is used well and that is to live on it and also to do good with it to others. What is obtained dishonestly is squandered in a licentious life. Once one has a taste for this, he is insatiable and will want to appropriate even more unrightfully to finance his luxurious lifestyle.

The widow in Zarephath, who had little but had with Elijah the resources of God in her home (1Kgs 17:10-15), was better off than Jezebel with her “great income with injustice” (2Kgs 9:32-37). In a spiritual sense, we can apply this to the church on earth. True believers, the true church, have little in earthly terms, but possess God’s righteousness in Christ. They have little power. Opposed to this is the false church, the roman-catholic system that boasts of possessing all spiritual wealth, but without entitlement. The true church has nothing but Christ; the false church has everything but Christ.

Verse 9 shows the contrast there can be between what we intend and what actually happens. God determines what actually happens. We may plan for the way we want to go. But if we want to take steps to go that way, we must keep in mind that ultimately the Lord directs our lives (Jer 10:23; Psa 37:23). The point is to learn to say: “If the Lord wills and we will live and also do this or that” (Jam 4:13-15; 1Thes 3:11).

10 - 15 The Characteristics of a King After God’s Heart

A series of proverbs about kings follows in these verses. What is said of a king and of kings in these verses is perfectly put into practice by the Lord Jesus, both now in His government in hiddenness and soon, when He will reign openly over the world. Kings are the representatives of God on earth (Rom 13:1-7). God wants their speech and actions to express His characteristics as a righteous Ruler.

This also applies to the speaking and acting of believers in this age, for they are a royal priesthood (1Pet 2:9) and made to be a kingdom (Rev 1:6). They do not yet have governmental duties, but they do have the dignity of kings and should behave accordingly.

The first and foremost duty of one who rules is to make righteous decisions (verse 10). A king must make righteous judgments in disputes. When there is “a divine decision is in the lips of the king”, it refers to an official judicial verdict by him in his capacity as king. Such a verdict cannot be appealed, nor is it necessary. It is literally an “oracle”, a judgment of God, because he represents God. It does not mean that he is infallible, but it makes it clear what kind of responsible function he has. Similarly, when we serve with our gift of grace, we too are responsible that our speaking should be “as utterances of God” (1Pet 4:11). Also here the word “utterances” is literally “oracles”.

The king who is aware of his high position and great responsibility will “not err in judgment” with “his mouth”. This applies perfectly to the Lord Jesus. Err in judgment is a judgment contrary to the truth. In that case, a king acquits the guilty and condemns the innocent. God never does that and neither does the Lord Jesus. A believer who lives in fellowship with God and Christ will never do that either.

Verse 11 is between verses that deal with a king and kings. Therefore, this verse applies primarily to them. They must be completely honest, incorruptible. It is not a king who determines what is honest and dishonest, but God. God is the sovereign Ruler of morality, not the king. God is the source of honesty and justice in all human relationships and actions. The proverb is about “a just balance and scales” and about “the weights of the bag”. The law of the LORD states that the means of weighing must be just (Lev 19:36; Deu 25:13; Amos 8:5; Mic 6:11).

God has given man the ability to work with weights and measures. It is due to Him that they are there. Just as He teaches the farmer how to work the land (Isa 28:23-29), He also teaches the merchant and everyone who trades. He makes regular buying and selling possible because He has given to man the skill of weighing. This enables him to earn money honestly and thus provide for his livelihood.

Because man is sinful, he must be told not to use deviant, that is, false, weights and measures. He must be trustworthy. This applies above all to those who have exemplary functions such as kings, but also parents, elders, teachers.

Cunning merchants had light and heavy weights for dishonest transactions. They used light weights when they had to sell something, bringing less goods than what was paid for. In our time, we can think of keeping and double accounting, always showing as evidence the account that provides the most benefit.

Reliability in commercial transactions must also be there when it comes to spiritual matters. If there are considerations to be made in a spiritual matter, it must be done fairly. Sympathy or antipathy should not play a role. The matter itself must be looked at, without regard to persons. It is also important to present the truth of God’s Word in a balanced way and not to emphasize certain truths at the expense of other truths.

A righteous king not only does justice, but it is also “an abomination” to him “to commit wicked acts” (verse 12). He abhors adultery and murder committed by others, but also abhors those sins for himself. What is wrong for others is certainly wrong for kings, who are supposed to punish the wrong.

If they themselves would commit wicked acts, it would endanger their throne. Righteous government determines the stability of rulers. Therefore, kings abhor committing criminal acts. The government of the Lord Jesus responds perfectly to this (Psa 45:6-7a; 89:14a).

God-fearing kings love righteousness and not hypocritical flattery (verse 13). Flattery is commonplace in palaces, but is despised by him who rules in the fear of God. People who are honest and forthright are valuable to country leaders. Political leaders know that without such people, the society over which they have authority turns into chaos. Only when the truth rules, government is well done. A king who wants to rule righteously will include trustworthy people in his government.

When a king’s fury is kindled, there is a threat of death emanating from it (verse 14). The manifestations of his fury are messengers of death to him or those over whom his fury is kindled. Those who are the objects of his fury would do well to behave wisely. Only wisdom offers an opportunity to escape death as a result of the king’s fury (Ecc 10:4).

God’s fury is ignited against sin. He sends out the warning of the judgment of death through messengers. Those who listen to those messengers and acknowledge that His judgment is justified, and thereby take their proper place before Him, see that there is a wise Man, Who has worked atonement. Christ appeased the fury of God over sin for everyone who believes, by suffering the fury of God’s anger in the place of every one who believes. As a result, everyone who believes and accepts the atonement is also wise.

Verses 14-15 belong together. A king has power over death (verse 14) and life (verse 15). Verse 15 is the flip side of verse 14. Against the dark fury of a king whose threat is death is the light of His face with the outcome being life. This light shines from God’s face for all who are reconciled to Him through the work of Christ. He who lives in the light lives true life. Light and life belong together (Jn 1:4).

On those who walk in the light of His face rests His favor. It means that they live in fellowship with Him. As a result, a great blessing emanates from Him for them. He is to them “like a cloud with the spring rain”. In Israel, the late rain is the rain that falls just before the harvest. This gives the harvest a final boost of growth to reach full maturity. It is also a picture of the coming of the Lord Jesus for His people (Hos 6:3) and, in addition, a picture of Him Himself (Psa 72:6). The greatest blessing of living in the light of God’s face is fellowship with Christ. This works spiritual growth and a looking forward to His coming.

In a prophetic sense, it points to the blessing Christ will bring to the earth in His reign on earth. Under His righteous government, the land will know a prosperity it has never known before (Psa 72:15-17).

16 Wisdom and Understanding, Not Gold and Silver

Wisdom is not a little, but far more valuable than the purest gold. Wisdom builds up a man, gold builds up his possessions. Wisdom and wealth are not incompatible. This comparison is about the difference between wealth without wisdom and wisdom without wealth. Earthly wealth without heavenly wisdom often comes from greed or often degenerates into it.

The power of the proverb is to encourage people to gain wisdom and understanding. If the choice what is “much better” is to be made between getting understanding and getting silver, Solomon clearly states that the choice should be to get understanding. Gold and silver are earthly, temporary things; wisdom and understanding, which can only come from God, are of lasting value. No precious metal gives satisfaction to the soul.

We find the meaning of this proverb in the words of the Lord Jesus not to gather treasures on earth, but in heaven. He says: “Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal. But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves do not break in or steal; for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also” (Mt 6:19-21).

17 The Highway

“The highway of upright” is the lofty way of life of upright persons. The highway is an elevated and paved way. The potholes in that way have been filled and the bumps in that road have been removed. The dangers of falling into a pit or tripping over a height are not present for the upright. This does not mean that they go their way carefree. They are aware that evil threatens them from all sides and depart from it. This proves that they are walking a highway and living in sincerity.

He who goes the highway and is careful to stay on it, “preserves his life”. He protects his life from calamity. Righteous living is a protection against calamity. The highway is the best way, but it is not the way everyone goes. It is the way of the pilgrim. He goes that way because this way is in his heart (Psa 84:5). It is “the Highway of Holiness” (Isa 35:8), which God shows us in His Word.

18 - 19 Humbleness Is Better Than a Haughty Spirit

It is an act of God’s justice that He humbles proud, haughty people (verse 18). They have exalted themselves and are thrown down by God. Their destruction and stumbling come when they imagine themselves at the height of their glory and with their noses on high defy God (Dan 4:30-31; Rev 18:7-8). He who walks with his nose on high does not see where he is walking and what he may stumble over. This causes his “destruction” and “stumbling”. Therefore, we need not fear the pride and haughtiness of others, but all the more our own pride and haughtiness. Haman is an illustration of this verse (Est 5:9-14; 7:1-10).

Verse 19 connects to verse 18. It is better to “be humble in spirit together with the lowly”, than to “divide” with the “proud” in “the spoil” of plunder. The humble in spirit submits to God. He is humble and does not push himself to the forefront. This proves that he belongs to the company of the lowly and therefore to the Lord Jesus from Whom they learned to be “gentle and humble in heart” (Mt 11:29). A person is gentle if he does not stand on his rights and does not defend himself when he is wronged.

The proud are those who rebel against God in their pride. They are presumptuous and oppressive. That there is mention of dividing the spoil with the proud points to the pressure that the proud put on the humble to join in their evil practices, using the bait of dividing the spoil with them. To avoid biting the bait, we must have a spirit of humility dependent on God.

20 - 24 The Value of the Word and Words

One conclusion we can draw from both lines of verse 20 is that “he who gives attention to the word ... trusts in the LORD”. Conversely, we can say that he who trusts in the LORD will give attention to the Word of God. “He who gives attention to the word” is literally “the wise dealing with the word”. This makes it a little clearer that it is not an occasional giving attention to the Word, but that what is meant is the daily, ongoing giving attention to the Word of God. It is about what God says and not what a person himself says.

Giving attention to the Word of God involves listening to its teaching. He who listens in that mind and so lives with God’s Word “will find good”. He will find in it the true meaning of life, that is Christ. He is the personification of the good. He is the Good.

That what matters is what God says and not the person being addressed here is evident from the second line of verse. Giving attention to what God says involves trusting Him. The trusting one is he who continually trusts. He who does so can truly be called “blessed”. He will receive all kinds of blessing (Jer 17:7). Through His Word, the LORD provides good things for those who pay attention to His Word, for those who take it seriously.

That a person is wise in heart will be evident in his speaking and his silence and his whole conduct (verse 21). Others will notice it and people will call him “wise”, a man of understanding, one who speaks with knowledge. His wise words will give him a reputation for competence and the opportunity to exert a beneficial influence on those around him.

His manner of speaking makes it a pleasure to listen to him. His words are sweet or pleasant. They are kind words spoken with a certain gracefulness. There is no bitterness or sharpness in them. What he says builds up the listener, it gives him a greater understanding of that which is being spoken about. His words of teaching are well received because they are persuasive. The wise in heart is “able to teach” (1Tim 3:2).

The “fountain of life” that possessors of understanding have in their understanding (verse 22) is given to them by God. That fountain is a refreshment not only for the possessors, but also for all around them. The New Testament believer also possesses such a fountain. Of that, it is said that rivers of living water flow from his inside to others to refresh them (Jn 4:14; 7:38-39). That refreshment can only flow to others through the power of the Holy Spirit. Thus, Paul was a fountain of life by the power of the Spirit in proclaiming the gospel and strengthening believers (Acts 14:21-22).

We too can be that, for we too have been given the understanding by which we know Him Who is true (1Jn 5:20). It is the understanding that was first darkness (Eph 4:18), but is now opened and enlightened by the Spirit of Christ, enabling us to understand the Scriptures (Lk 24:45). With the knowledge we have of Him, we can serve others and thus become a fountain of life for others.

With the fool there is no fountain of life. Fools have nothing in them but a fountain of folly. When they say something about discipline, it is nothing but foolishness. Whoever listens to it becomes equal to fools.

He who has a wise heart will be instructed by his heart to say wise things (verse 23). He will also know when to speak and to whom. He not only speaks well-chosen words that the other person understands, but his words are instructive and increase the understanding of him to whom he speaks. What the wise person says is not only helpful but also promotes growth. He adds persuasiveness, which also is evident in the words that come from his lips.

The heart of a wise person is a fountain of words of wisdom. This is true only of the born-again heart. When the Word of Christ dwells richly in us, we will in all wisdom teach and admonish one another with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs (Col 3:16).

By “pleasant words” (verse 24) will be meant the words from the heart of the wise one of the previous verse. Such words have the sweetness of a honeycomb (Psa 19:10; 119:103). Sweet words are comforting and encouraging. They may be words from the Word of God, or words spoken in prayer or praise. They are words that God loves to listen to, as well as anyone born of Him.

Like the honey in a honeycomb is produced by diligent bees, sweet words are the result of continuous dealings with God in secret. He who can speak sweet words has diligently studied the Scriptures and can bring out old and new things from them for the good of the listeners, for encouragement and restoration of spiritual strength (Mt 13:52).

We see the beneficial effect of using a little honey with Jonathan (1Sam 14:27). In a spiritual sense, sweet words have that same effect. Sweet words are not sugary words. They are loving yet clear, persuasive words. Sweet words are healing when they come from the teaching of God’s Word.

Bones are the strength by which the body can move and move forward. Spiritual and physical strength comes back when we have heard uplifting words. Words of prophecy, that is, words spoken for “edification, exhortation and comfort” (1Cor 14:3), can be listened to like melodious music (cf. 1Chr 25:1-6).

25 The End of a Seemingly Right Way

This proverb is identical to a verse in Proverbs 14 (Pro 14:12). There this proverb is related to appearances that deceive (Pro 14:11-13), to seeing what is before one’s eyes while the reality is different. It is relying on what you see without realizing that you are being fooled. Here the proverb is related to the way we live our life and what it turns out to be. It is about how we think about and fill in our own life versus the way God thinks about it and wants it to be lived.

The way that seems straight to someone can be the way of pleasure and carefree enjoyment. We see that the one seemingly straight road, ends in countless ways of death. There is plenty of choice on that one way, but every choice on it leads to death. This need not even be about the choice to live in gross sin. If there is enough money, if one’s career can be made, if one’s family is doing well and one also gives to each his own, then a person thinks he is on the right way. Such people will be deceived. With it, it is like the man who said: ‘I climbed the ladder of success, but I discovered that it was against the wrong wall.’

Another path that may seem right to someone is that of total freedom. Give free sex space in any relationship one wants, give man the right to life and death by allowing him to commit abortion and euthanasia, and it will be said that this is the right way to and from happiness. Again, it will turn out that that way ends in death.

The broad way of sin seems right because many walk on it. But it is appearance, for that way ends in death (Mt 7:13-14). The way of death is walked by those who take their mind, their feelings or their conscience as the standard and not God’s Word. A person goes the way that is truly right only when he trusts Christ and not his own understanding, and acknowledge Him in all his ways (Pro 3:5-6).

26 Hunger Urges to Work

Hunger stimulates a man, excites him, urges him, pressures him, to work diligently (cf. Ecc 6:7). Hunger is good and has the beneficial effect of prompting a person to work to earn money. This makes it possible to buy food with which to satisfy hunger. The New Testament also mentions the importance of working several times, among other things so that one can earn a living as well as give to others (2Thes 3:10-12; Eph 4:28).

In spiritual terms, the same is true. Those who are newly converted and have new life will crave spiritual food (1Pet 2:2). Spiritual hunger prompts one to diligently examine God’s Word.

27 - 30 The Worthless, Perverse, Violent Man

These verses are about the worthless or depraved, perverse and violent man. There is an ascent in it. It begins with the “worthless man”, that is, what this man is in himself and how he acts (verse 27). Worthless or depraved men devise ways to slander people. “A worthless man” is literally a “man of Belial”, someone in whom there is nothing good. The term describes deep depravity and wickedness.

This man is an evil person because he “digs up evil”. The meaning is that of bringing evil to the surface and making great efforts to do so. Digging up is hard work. He will go through someone’s entire file to find something evil that he can use. Social media is an example of a wide and deep ‘digging ground’, where certain data can also be manipulated in such a way that it serves the evil purpose the worthless man has in mind.

Whatever evil he digs up, regardless of whether it is true or a lie, he scatters his words as seed. His speaking is “like scorching fire”, indicating the devastating effect of his words. James speaks of the tongue as “a fire, the world of iniquity” and continues: “The tongue is set among our members as that which defiles the entire body and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire by hell” (Jam 3:6).

The worthless man of verse 27 is the “perverse man” in verse 28. He is a man of falsehoods and lies and “a slanderer”. Open attacks do not work, therefore he chooses to whisper lies and slander, imputations, half-truths. The perverse man causes quarrels and even brings separation between best friends.

He cannot make friends himself and cannot stand friendship between others. For this reason, he starts a smear campaign. He slanders one about the other and sows doubt and distrust between the two. He tells a lie about someone of which he knows it will be passed on. In doing so, he takes into account the fact that when it is passed on, it gets worse and worse. This is why he is called a “perverse man” because he ruins good relationships.

In verse 29, the worthless and perverse man of the previous verses has become “a man of violence”, “a man of hamas”. The friends are separated by his slander; he has already caused that harm. But with that he is not satisfied. They must also be killed. It is not only talk, but he uses violence.

He is also a deceiver, who wants to influence others to join him. The man of violence will want to influence people around him to commit the violence he has planned (Pro 1:10-14; 2:12-15). He wants to “lead” his neighbor “in a way that is not good”, that is, he wants to bring him into the criminal circuit.

To achieve the goal of verse 29, he devises “perverse things” and then “bring evil to pass” (verse 30). He is so committed to evil that his body language cannot suppress his evil intentions, but betrays them. Facial expressions often reveal whether someone has something evil in mind (Pro 6:13-14). Two expressions are mentioned here: winking or shutting one’s eyes and compressing one’s lips.

A person winks or shuts his eyes when he wants to think intently about something without being distracted. In this way, the worthless, perverse, violent man is totally focused on evil. He sees before him how it is going to happen. Compressing his lips means that a person restrains himself from expressing his feelings, either to laugh or to burst into anger. Here it points to hidden evil intentions that he is about to carry out.

31 - 32 A Gray Head, Patience and Self-Control

If someone has a gray head, or has gray hair. and thus wears “a crown of glory”, it is evidence that he is walking “the way of righteousness” and has walked it so far. Righteousness is rewarded with longevity (cf. Psa 92:14; Lk 1:5-7). Again, this is the general application of this book. The general meaning of righteousness in Proverbs is that the wicked do not live long and come to an early end and that the righteous live long. But that does not mean that it applies to everyone in all cases. The grayness of a wicked elderly is no ornament, and a person may die before the first gray hairs are seen even though he has walked in the way of righteousness.

It should be the greatest concern of the elderly to remain “in the way of righteousness”. When it is seen in their old age that they have walked with God and continue to do so, their “gray head is a crown of glory” to them. Solomon says this primarily to the young. Young people are prone to see especially youthful strength as an ornamental crown, sometimes despising elders because of their physical weakness. God’s Word forbids this and demands respect for the elderly in its place (Lev 19:32). Those who abide by it show respect for God’s choice of righteousness over youthful strength.

But this Word is not only important for young people. For older people, it is important that they behave worthy of that “crown of glory”. Let old believers be old disciples (Acts 21:16). By doing so, they give young people reason to respect them. It is along the same lines as what is said to Timothy that he should take care that no one despises him because of his youthful age (1Tim 4:12). Separately, it is always appropriate for young people to treat older people with respect, even when an elderly person does not behave with dignity (Gen 9:20-27).

Just as a gray head is superior to youthful strength (verse 31), patience is superior to physical strength (verse 32). Being slow to anger or patience is a characteristic of God (Exo 34:6; Nah 1:3) and part of the fruit of the Spirit (Gal 5:22-23a). A person is “mighty” on a particular occasion in a particular case, but “he who is slow to anger” is better, for he demonstrates this Godly characteristic not only on particular occasions, but constantly.

“He who rules his spirit”, or ‘controls’ his spirit, or controls himself, proves that he is better “than he who captures a city”. Capturing a city after a shorter or longer siege is an act involving casualties. Self-control or self-judgment does not harm anyone, but rather saves lives. It is for the blessing of others and for self-protection.

A pious man once said to the king: ‘You are the servant of my servant.’ By this he meant: ‘You are the slave of your evil inclinations, while I am the master of my evil inclinations.’ The heart is a battlefield. The evil tendencies that dwell in it are deadly enemies. For the believer, they are vanquished enemies. The point is about killing the evil tendencies as soon as they want to assert themselves (Col 3:5), that is, defusing them immediately in self-judgment. We do this by seeing them as judged in Christ on the cross. The true power to overcome lies in knowing our position in Christ. In Him we are more than overcomers (Rom 8:37).

33 Man Considers, but God Decides

This verse is about the practice of seeking Divine guidance by casting lots. What is decided by lot is ultimately the LORD’s decision. Even if unbelievers do it, He is above it. He determines the course of events. Nothing happens outside of Him, without His will. He is involved in everything and it happens according to His counsel. We see His hand in everything, a hand that directs all events with wisdom. We see that the chapter ends as it began, with a word about God’s sovereignty.

In the Old Testament, the lot was cast, among other things, to

1. arrange service in the temple (1Chr 24:5,31; 25:7-8);

2. bring the truth to light (1Sam 14:41);

3. to detect transgressors (Jos 7:16);

4. cause disputes to cease (Pro 18:18);

5. divide the land of Canaan among the tribes (Num 26:55).

The last mention of the use of the lot in Scripture is in connection with the question of who was to succeed Judas Iscariot as apostle (Acts 1:26).

The Christian does not need the lot, for he has the Holy Spirit dwelling within him, Who guides him into all the truth (Jn 16:13). He also has at his disposal the complete Word of God in which he can learn the will of God. Thereby prayer is at his disposal. He may approach God directly as his Father to ask Him about His will.
