Deuteronomy 3

The Land

1 - 7 Og Given into the Hand of Israel

1 “Then we turned and went up the road to Bashan, and Og, king of Bashan, with all his people came out to meet us in battle at Edrei.
2 But the LORD said to me, ‘Do not fear him, for I have delivered him and all his people and his land into your hand; and you shall do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon.’
3 So the LORD our God delivered Og also, king of Bashan, with all his people into our hand, and we smote them until no survivor was left.
4 We captured all his cities at that time; there was not a city which we did not take from them: sixty cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
5 All these were cities fortified with high walls, gates and bars, besides a great many unwalled towns.
6 We utterly destroyed them, as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women and children of every city.
7 But all the animals and the spoil of the cities we took as our booty.

Og has not been warned by Sihon’s defeat. Audaciously, relying on his own strength, he comes out to meet Israel to fight against them. With his gigantic length and with, which can be deduced from the size of his bed (verse 11), he must have made a great impression on God’s people. Hence the encouragement of the LORD that they should not be afraid of him and that he would give him and his people and land into their hands. The previous victory, that over Sihon, is cited as evidence. As God spoke, so He did .

The victory over Og is often mentioned along with that over Sihon (Jos 9:10; Psa 135:10-11; 136:19-20). The areas ruled by these kings were the first areas to be conquered by Israel. They both lay on the eastern side or the wilderness side of the Jordan. For the Christian, they represent enemies with whom he will have to deal if he wants to take possession of the blessings of the heavenly land. Before that battle begins, the enemy he meets in everyday life must first be conquered.

In Sihon we meet a person who is proud and has a hardened heart. With him the emphasis is on the spirit, the intellect of man. He looks upon his possessions as his property; it is his. God is outside his thoughts. He is king of Heshbon. About the meaning of the name Heshbon, or Cheshbon, I got the following from a sister from Israel as an explanation:

‘Here is a brief explanation of Cheshbon. Each Hebrew verb consists of a root of usually three letters. In this case that is ch’sh’v (pronounce chashav) which means thinking or reflect on. The word cheshbon is used in the daily Ivriet of today for calculation lessons (at primary school) but also for an invoice or calculation.’

From this explanation we can make the application that in Sihon, who is king of Heshbon, we see someone who relies on his intellect, and who excludes God from his thinking. He says of his possessions: ‘I have worked hard for it, so why should I thank God for it?’ The question may be asked: How do we see for example our health and money and possessions? As something to which we are entitled to and what we can use for ourselves, or as something with which we can serve the Lord? The Lord wants us to learn to receive this as an inheritance from His hand. That is why we will have to conquer it in battle, that is to say, it is not without difficulty that our earthly blessings are realized.

With Og, the emphasis is more on the soul, the desire. He had a large bed. That’s the way Og enjoys what he has: in laziness and relaxation. Do we spend our holidays and leisure time as if it were something that belongs to us? We have to withdraw these things from Og’s area of power in order to do something with them for the Lord. The zeitgeist of the world also comes to us. We stand on our rights, without remembering that God has given them to us. If these things make our thankfulness go to God, we will relish engaging in ‘the land’.

We should not, by the way, go wrong to the other side either. We are not dead to everything of nature. Then we shouldn’t eat and drink anymore. The things of the earth are given to us by God and we thank Him for them, but they are not our specific Christian, heavenly blessings.

Og underwent the same fate as Sihon. The victory was great. After forty years of roaming through the wilderness, where they probably did not see a city, they are now facing fortresses that are considered impregnable. But for a people with God at her side, no obstacle is too great. No less than sixty fortified cities were taken and also “a great many unwalled towns.” With God, the weakest people are the most powerful enemies.

There was no struggle not to be conquered and to remain free, but there was a struggle to conquer and take possession. The enemies were expelled, not because of a cruel, avenging God. God is a merciful God. He always gives the opportunity to escape judgment, but over unrepentance He metes righteous judgment.

8 - 17 The Part of the Two and a Half Tribes

8 “Thus we took the land at that time from the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from the valley of Arnon to Mount Hermon
9 (Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir):
10 all the cities of the plateau and all Gilead and all Bashan, as far as Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
11 (For only Og king of Bashan was left of the remnant of the Rephaim. Behold, his bedstead was an iron bedstead; it is in Rabbah of the sons of Ammon. Its length was nine cubits and its width four cubits by ordinary cubit.)
12 “So we took possession of this land at that time. From Aroer, which is by the valley of Arnon, and half the hill country of Gilead and its cities I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
13 The rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh, all the region of Argob (concerning all Bashan, it is called the land of Rephaim.
14 Jair the son of Manasseh took all the region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and called it, [that is], Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-jair, [as it is] to this day.)
15 To Machir I gave Gilead.
16 To the Reubenites and to the Gadites I gave from Gilead even as far as the valley of Arnon, the middle of the valley as a border and as far as the river Jabbok, the border of the sons of Ammon;
17 the Arabah also, with the Jordan as [a] border, from Chinnereth even as far as the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, at the foot of the slopes of Pisgah on the east.

In the victory over the two kings of the Amorites, Moses had a taste of the victories that the people would achieve in the land. After recounting the victory over the Amorites, he recalls the division of the area on the wilderness side of the Jordan among the two and a half tribes (Num 32:31-40). Here too he will have gained the same experience and tasted something of the division of the promised land when the people will arrive there.

18 - 20 Commitment of the Two and a Half Tribes

18 “Then I commanded you at that time, saying, ‘The LORD your God has given you this land to possess it; all you valiant men shall cross over armed before your brothers, the sons of Israel.
19 But your wives and your little ones and your livestock (I know that you have much livestock) shall remain in your cities which I have given you,
20 until the LORD gives rest to your fellow countrymen as to you, and they also possess the land which the LORD your God will give them beyond the Jordan. Then you may return every man to his possession which I have given you.’

Moses does not forget that wilderness side of the Jordan is not the promised land. The land where the blessing of God is enjoyed is still before them. He recalls the two and a half tribes’ commitment to help conquer the land first.

We can learn from this that we should not only look for our own interests, but also for those of others (Phil 2:4). If we ourselves have rest, we will seek it for our brothers. We are members of each other and in the blessing of our fellow believer is also our blessing. We will work toward that.

21 - 22 Joshua Encouraged by Moses

21 I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, ‘Your eyes have seen all that the LORD your God has done to these two kings; so the LORD shall do to all the kingdoms into which you are about to cross.
22 Do not fear them, for the LORD your God is the one fighting for you.’

Moses, the elder believer, encourages Joshua, the younger believer. He shows him what God has done and what He has promised. Seeing something with one’s own eyes makes God’s acts of salvation toward His people actual for every generation. Moses uses this expression more often in this book (Deu 4:3,9; 7:19; 9:17; 10:21; 11:12; 34:4).

In Moses we also see here a picture of the Lord Jesus as the One Who died for us and also rose up. We see that in the picture of the Red Sea. Then we see how He leads us through the wilderness, which is a picture of what the world is for the life of faith. Joshua is a picture of the Lord Jesus as the One risen from death and glorified, the Lord Who guides His people into the land and makes them share the blessing of the land.

23 - 25 Moses’ Prayer for Grace

23 “I also pleaded with the LORD at that time, saying,
24 ‘O LORD GOD, You have begun to show Your servant Your greatness and Your strong hand; for what god is there in heaven or on earth who can do such works and mighty acts as Yours?
25 Let me, I pray, cross over and see the fair land that is beyond the Jordan, that good hill country and Lebanon.’

Moses recalls how he begged the LORD if he could still enter the land. He does not speak here about his failure and the punishment of God, but about his desire to enter the land. After encouraging Joshua with a view to conquering the land, in Moses that deep desire to enter the land with the people will have risen.

He did not speak his question in rebellion. He has not asked to enter the land to be a leader, to assert himself. His question did not arise from envy of Joshua. To him it is about the land itself. He spoke with great admiration about the inheritance that the LORD has prepared for His people and called it “the fair land” and “that good hill country”. He fully appreciates the land of God. Just like Moses, the Lord Jesus looked forward to that land. It was to Him “the joy set before Him” (Heb 12:2). Do we give Him the occasion to introduce us into that land as the true Joshua?

Moses appealed to God to finish what He had begun. Moses had already been allowed to see so much of Him, especially in the conquest of the kingdoms of Sihon and Og; now he would also like to see the completion of His endeavor here. God had said that he was not allowed to cross over. Nevertheless, he asked if he could cross over. Had not the LORD turned-about earlier on a matter through a prayer of Moses? Cast your mind back to God’s intention to exterminate the people after the sin with the golden calf, and after the refusal to enter the land. On the basis of Moses’ intercession, He had forgiven them then (Num 14:20).

26 - 27 The Answer of the LORD

26 But the LORD was angry with me on your account, and would not listen to me; and the LORD said to me, ‘Enough! Speak to Me no more of this matter.
27 Go up to the top of Pisgah and lift up your eyes to the west and north and south and east, and see [it] with your eyes, for you shall not cross over this Jordan.

The LORD had become angry with Moses, but it was on account of the people’s past deportment. His deed was the result of the sin of the people (Psa 106:32-33). When we think about the inheritance, do we also think about the way in which we got it: because God was angry with the Lord Jesus on our account?

The answer of the LORD to the supplication of Moses is not a reproach. Moses’ prayer was a prayer to God’s heart. Thus the Lord Jesus prayed three times if the cup He was to drink could be taken from Him (Mt 26:39-44). His perfection is evident from that prayer and from His surrender to God’s will: “Yet not as I will, but as You will.”

Paul also prayed three times that an angel of Satan who tormented him would leave him: “Because of the surpassing greatness of the revelations, for this reason, to keep me from exalting myself, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to torment me—to keep me from exalting myself! Concerning this I implored the Lord three times that it might leave me” (2Cor 12:7-8). He received an answer similar to the one Moses received: “My grace is sufficient for you” (2Cor 12:9).

Our prayer can please God without giving us what we ask for. He wants us to learn to entrust ourselves to His will. God and His peace, to us imparted, is more than anything we can ask for. When He says that we should no longer ask Him about a certain matter, we must learn that what He does not consider suitable to give us is not suitable for us to ask.

Yet Moses received an answer to his prayer. God allowed him to stand in a place from where he could see the whole land in its length and breadth (Num 27:12-14; Deu 34:1-4). God enabled him to look further than is conceivable with natural eyes. He has seen more than any Israelite would ever see. Not only is his gaze not darkened (Deu 34:7), God has clarified his gaze in such a way that he has been able to see the whole land. If God keeps something from us and we trust Him in it, He gives something in its place that goes beyond what we have asked for.

28 - 29 Joshua Will Bring the People into the Land

28 But charge Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him, for he shall go across at the head of this people, and he will give them as an inheritance the land which you will see.’
29 So we remained in the valley opposite Beth-peor.

Strengthened by what the LORD would show him, he was to give Joshua his charges, and to encourage and strengthen him. Moses knew what he was talking about when he handed over the leadership to Joshua and pointed out to him what to do. It must also have been an encouragement for Moses knowing that the work the LORD started with him would be completed by Joshua. This is already the third time that the transfer of the leadership from Moses to Joshua is discussed (Deu 1:38; 3:21-22). It is important for Moses, for Joshua and for the people.

In the place where the people dwell, “opposite Beth-peor”, Moses makes his speech (Deu 4:45-46). There he is also buried (Deu 34:6).

After reading Deuteronomy 2-3, a succinct summation is: God’s actions in the past are an encouragement for the future.
