Nahum 2

The judgment on Nineveh

Introduction

In this chapter we see that the LORD is sending a great army to Nineveh to avenge the reproach inflicted upon Judah and restore his glory (verses 1-4). The city is conquered, its inhabitants flee or are captured and its treasures robbed (verses 5-10). The great city with all its glory perishes without leaving a trace (verses 11-13).

1 The Enemy Comes

Nineveh is informed that the “one who scatters”, that is, the Medes with the Babylonians, has come up. The enemy is not called “attacker” here, but “one who scatters”. The Assyrians were experts in uprooting and scattering conquered peoples, so that there was no longer cohesion in those peoples. As a result, it was not possible for conquered peoples to regroup and resist. They themselves will now be scattered and experience what they have done to others (cf. Psa 68:1; Isa 24:1).

The city is ironically encouraged to strengthen itself to resist the approaching army. The words of Nahum are ironic because God has decided to destroy the city. Therefore, any defense will prove to be futile. Strengthening the back means making oneself strong, behave as a man.

2 Restoration of Israel

Just as the destruction of Nineveh is determined, so is the restoration of Jacob, that is Israel, the twelve tribes. Jacob and Israel are the same person, but with a different accent. “Glory” indicates exaltation or elevation. It foresees the time when Israel will reign over the nations in strength and blessing. Then Jacob, i.e. the people, will regain his own glory that was lost through his own fault.

The name Jacob – meaning ‘heels holder’ – reminds us of weakness and unfaithfulness. Jacob is the name for the people in their deviation from the LORD, through which they have lost all the glory they once possessed. They regain that glory when they are restored in their relationship with the LORD. The glory that returns is the glory of Israel. Israel – meaning ‘prince of God’ – is the name of the people in their privileges that they have received from God as His people.

“The devastators” are the Assyrians who have devastated Judah. They have also “destroyed their vine branches”. “Vine branches” is a reference to Israel as the vineyard, the vine (Psa 80:8-16), where we can see in the vine the families and in the branches the members. Vine branches are a picture of the joy that the LORD seeks for Himself with His people. In the time of Israel’s unfaithfulness, that joy was not there (Isa 5:1-7). Here the Assyrians are blamed for it, which is one more reason to judge them.

3 - 4 The Hostile Army

Here the army of the Medes and the Babylonians is described which is announced in verse 1. By “his mighty men” are meant the heroes of the army of the Medes and the Babylonians. It is also possible to see them as the mighty men of the LORD, because He deploys that army against Nineveh (cf. Isa 5:26-30; 10:5-6; 13:3).

The red color dominates in that army (cf. Eze 23:14), possibly because of the use of red paint or because the weapons are covered with bronze. It is the color of aggression (green is a soothing color). The military outfit is also red, due to the use of crimson. The brandishing of the spears is a use to impress the enemy, to show how skilled they are in their use.

At breakneck speed the enemy overtakes Nineveh. In the glow of the sun, the steel chariots resemble burning torches. Because of their great speed they are reminiscent of lightning flashes. The battle takes place in the streets and in the squares. The Ninevites can’t get a grip on it. They are consumed by it as if by the fire of torches. Everything happens at the speed of lightning.

5 Progress in the Battle

Here we are told what the king of Assyria thinks. God knows the thoughts of the hearts of all people. The king of Assyria thinks he can repel the attack and counts on “his nobles”, the military leaders. They rush to the wall. The protection of the wall is of the utmost importance during a siege. But at the hour of truth, they stumble in their haste to climb the wall. The nobles come too late, because the attackers have already set up the mantelet to storm the wall.

6 Water Flood as a Weapon

The fall is unstoppable. In a few words the fall of Nineveh is described. For this, God uses a flood of “the rivers” which brings down the wall and destroys the palace. At Nineveh three rivers come together. The Tigris flows close to the walls, the Khosr and the Tebiltu flow through the city. The “gates” of the rivers can refer to sluices or dams that control the water flows. By opening the sluices and breaking through the dams, an enormous flood of water is given free rein. The inhabitants of the palace dissolve from fear of the unstoppable water flow.

7 The Misery of Nineveh

Here we see the result of the final overrun in verse 6. “Stripped” means stripped of all her luster. The inhabitants of the city are seen as handmaids. They mourn their fate, which can be heard in their sound similar to doves and can be seen beating on their breasts.

8 On the Run

Nineveh has been arrogant and proud since her birth. Now that her end has come, there is nothing left of it. What offered a natural protection, has become her downfall. Here again irony can be heard. What she first enjoyed in selfishness as the content of her origin and life, is the cause of her death.

Orders to soldiers to stay at their posts are ignored by them. They have all fled in panic.

9 Call to Plunder Nineveh

Once the defensive walls have fallen and the defenders have fled, the enormous treasures piled up in the city can be plundered. The call to do so comes from God through the prophet. Nineveh always made this call himself when the Assyrians went to war to conquer territories. As a result, she became the richest city in the near east. Now she suffers the same fate. The rich stock of all kinds of precious objects seems endless. The enemies can take their course.

10 All Wealth and Hope Are Gone

The victory over the city is powerfully summed up in the three words of the first line of this verse – emptied, desolate, waste – that sound like a rhyme in Hebrew (buqah umebuqah umebullaqah). In synonyms the devastation is described, as if there are no words enough to indicate how great and thorough it is. A city that was once rich and influential is now a wretched mess, without treasures and without life. That is what remains of power used against God.

The inhabitants of the city who flee are no better off. All courage has been lost to them, all power has disappeared. Wherever there should be strength, “hearts and knees”, all strength is gone. There is anguish in the whole body. Powerlessness is already hopeless and when anguish is added, the situation is completely hopeless. And not only is there no view of outcome, the view that is there makes all faces grow pale, that is to say, all color is draining from the faces, they become white as a sheet. There is only a view of horror and an abundance of misery.

11 A Mockery Question

Opposite the pruning “where?” that comes from the mouth of the king of Assyria (2Kgs 18:34), here the challenging “where?” sounds from the mouth of the LORD. The picture of the lion shows the robbing greed of the leaders and the people of Nineveh. The lion is an animal often found in Assyrian inscriptions. Kings of Nineveh compared themselves to it. Like lions they tore up the inhabitants of conquered cities.

In spirit, Nahum sees the city as wiped out. He looks at the place where she once stood, but no longer sees her. It was a city full of predatory rulers who, like lions, tore peoples apart, plundered their treasures and filled Nineveh with them. Nothing is left of all those horrors.

To make the picture even more impressive, Nahum uses different names and different ages of the lions. Eight times in verses 11-13 he uses a word for lion, in different compositions. He talks about the male lion, the female, the young lion who already hunts and the cub, who is not yet able to do so. Everything was under her control, nobody frightened her, she was so sure of her power.

12 The Tearing Nature of Nineveh

In verse 11 it is about the city, in this verse it is about the inhabitants. Nineveh has killed in a cruel, ruthless way and thus provided the city with booty. The city has enjoyed this abundantly and greedily.

13 The LORD Will Judge Nineveh

With the opening words “behold, I am against you” the LORD announces the judgment on the boundless tyranny of Nineveh. He speaks here in His majesty as “the LORD of hosts”. All powers in heaven and earth are subject to Him. The chariots are burned up. That is the end of her military power. This is what the Assyrians trusted in above all.

Also the whole radiance of power, seen in the young lions, is devoured. This is done by the sword of the enemy. When the lion is defeated, his prey, everything he had in his power, is also exterminated. The messengers who delivered and carried out royal orders (1Kgs 19:2; 2Kgs 19:23; Isa 37:9,14,24) will not be heard again (cf. Eze 19:9).
