Genesis 25

The Beginning

1 - 6 Descendants of Abraham and Ketura

1 Now Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah.
2 She bore to him Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah.
3 Jokshan became the father of Sheba and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim and Letushim and Leummim.
4 The sons of Midian [were] Ephah and Epher and Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these [were] the sons of Keturah.
5 Now Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac;
6 but to the sons of his concubines, Abraham gave gifts while he was still living, and sent them away from his son Isaac eastward, to the land of the east.

Abraham has taken an extra wife next to Hagar. Scripture is silent about it when that has happened. However, the Holy Spirit does not mention this relationship and who came forth from it until now, after the relationship between Isaac and Rebekah. In Abraham all the nations of the earth will be blessed (Gen 12:2-3). It has been said several times that his descendants will be as the sand which is on the seashore and as the stars of the heavens, which speaks of an earthly people (sand) and a heavenly people (stars).

Besides Isaac and Ishmael, we now find more sons. They represent the nations of the earth, all of which will also be blessed by what the LORD promised Abraham. The blessing for the whole earth will be enjoyed in the millennial realm of peace. That blessing will come through the son of the promise.

Abraham gives everything he has to Isaac, while there are gifts for the other sons. Thus God has given the Lord Jesus, as Heir of all things, all things into His hands. And He distributes it to others.

The other sons are sent away “eastward”, which in Genesis indicates being put aside. They are sent away from Isaac here, just like Ishmael before, but with gifts, just like Ishmael also got promises. There is also blessing for them. People who are bound to Israel by fleshly bonds will be blessed in the realm of peace through Israel.

7 - 11 Death and Burial of Abraham

7 These are all the years of Abraham’s life that he lived, one hundred and seventy-five years.
8 Abraham breathed his last and died in a ripe old age, an old man and satisfied [with life]; and he was gathered to his people.
9 Then his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, facing Mamre,
10 the field which Abraham purchased from the sons of Heth; there Abraham was buried with Sarah his wife.
11 It came about after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac lived by Beer-lahai-roi.

When Abraham dies, he is buried by his two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, next to Sarah. They both, still, wait in the land of promise in the grave for the fulfillment of the promise.

God’s blessing is for Isaac, who dwells at the well Lahai-roi, the well that speaks of God’s Word and His revelation therein.

12 - 18 The Generations of Ishmael

12 Now these are [the records of] the generations of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s maid, bore to Abraham;
13 and these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, in the order of their birth: Nebaioth, the firstborn of Ishmael, and Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam
14 and Mishma and Dumah and Massa,
15 Hadad and Tema, Jetur, Naphish and Kedemah.
16 These are the sons of Ishmael and these are their names, by their villages, and by their camps; twelve princes according to their tribes.
17 These are the years of the life of Ishmael, one hundred and thirty-seven years; and he breathed his last and died, and was gathered to his people.
18 They settled from Havilah to Shur which is east of Egypt as one goes toward Assyria; he settled in defiance of all his relatives.

Before the history of Isaac begins, the descendants of Isaac are mentioned first. The natural comes first, then the spiritual (1Cor 15:46). The flesh, nature, always seems to win first, and the Spirit seems to lose. But in the end everything God has promised will be fulfilled. That is what faith relies on.

The descendants of Ishmael live “from Havilah to Shur” which is between Egypt and Assyria. These are the greatest enemies of Israel, but ultimately God also takes care of them just as He does of Israel (Isa 19:23).

For the record, at the end of this section again the types, what the different persons represent:

1. Abraham represents the principle of faith;

2. Sarah the principle of grace;

3. Hagar the principle of law;

4. Isaac is the Son, died and risen;

5. Ishmael is Israel according to the flesh;

6. Rebekah the church;

7. Ketura the nations.

19 - 26 Birth of Esau and Jacob

19 Now these are [the records of] the generations of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham became the father of Isaac;
20 and Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Aramean, to be his wife.
21 Isaac prayed to the LORD on behalf of his wife, because she was barren; and the LORD answered him [literally: was entreated of him] and Rebekah his wife conceived.
22 But the children struggled together within her; and she said, “If it is so, why then am I [this way]?” So she went to inquire of the LORD.
23 The LORD said to her,

“Two nations are in your womb;

And two peoples will be separated from your body;

And one people shall be stronger than the other;

And the older shall serve the younger.”

24 When her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
25 Now the first came forth red, all over like a hairy garment; and they named him Esau.
26 Afterward his brother came forth with his hand holding on to Esau’s heel, so his name was called Jacob; and Isaac was sixty years old when she gave birth to them.

When the birth of a son lacks with Abraham, he tries to conceive him in the power of the flesh. What is begotten, Ishmael, is not the son of promise. When the birth of a son lacks with Isaac, it leads him to prayer, despite the fact that he knows the promise of God. Barrenness must bring faith into action. The answer to his prayer was still twenty years away. But God is to be entreated. We find that God lets Himself to be entreated several times in the Old Testament (Gen 25:21; 2Chr 33:13,19; Ezra 8:22-23).

Isaac has prayed the LORD on behalf of his wife. Although God has promised to multiply his descendants, he prays for it. This is an important indication that God’s promises encourage us to pray. God’s promises form the basis of our prayer (Dan 9:2-3). Although Isaac prayed for this blessing for many years and the answer did not come, he did not stop praying. The Lord Jesus exhorts us to pray always and not to become discouraged (Lk 18:1). If we do, we will experience that we are not seeking God’s face in vain.

Rebekah has her own dealings with the LORD and asks Him why she is expecting twins. She receives an answer from the LORD. The two boys are two peoples, each with their own place on earth, determined by Him.

It is not written here that God hated Esau. That is written in Malachi 1, that is to say, only fourteen hundred years later, after Esau in his descendants has shown his true nature of wickedness and revolt (Mal 1:2-3). If Esau had suited himself in the place God gives him here, even before his birth, he would have received the full blessing of it.

Jacob reveals already at his birth that he wants to master Esau in his own way, that he wants to receive the blessing of God in his own power (Hos 12:3a). Esau, the stronger one, comes out first, but Jacob’s hand holds the heel of Esau. He wants to be as it were ahead of Esau. By doing so, he indicates that he wants to seize the birthright and the related blessing.

The name he gets alludes to this. “Jacob” means “heels holder”, with the thought of holding the heel to bring someone down (cf. Gen 27:36). This name he would live up to many times in his life through his actions. Jacob is interested in the blessing of God, unlike Esau, but he wants to secure it by tricks.

27 - 28 Isaac Chooses Esau; Rebekah Chooses Jacob

27 When the boys grew up, Esau became a skillful hunter, a man of the field, but Jacob was a peaceful man, living in tents.
28 Now Isaac loved Esau, because he had a taste for game, but Rebekah loved Jacob.

Isaac and Rebekah, as parents, do not set a good example. They have both their own sweetheart, chosen on the basis of their own taste. That’s wrong. Children are not there for parents to satisfy their tastes, but parents are there for children to raise them up for the Lord.

We can have more respect for Rebekah than for Isaac. Isaac lets itself be guided by his lusts. Rebekah chooses Jacob and loves him, who indeed is chosen by God in the line of His promises. Esau is a hunter, a killer like Nimrod (Gen 10:8-9); Jacob is someone who lives in tents, a pilgrim, a shepherd.

29 - 34 Esau Despises the Birthright

29 When Jacob had cooked stew, Esau came in from the field and he was famished;
30 and Esau said to Jacob, “Please let me have a swallow of that red stuff there, for I am famished.” Therefore his name was called Edom.
31 But Jacob said, “First sell me your birthright.”
32 Esau said, “Behold, I am about to die; so of what [use] then is the birthright to me?”
33 And Jacob said, “First swear to me”; so he swore to him, and sold his birthright to Jacob.
34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and lentil stew; and he ate and drank, and rose and went on his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.

The first proof that Esau is a godless man and that Jacob himself wants to secure the blessing, is provided in this history with the lentil stew. The difference in character that appears here, will be expressed again and again in their future life. Esau is only interested in here-and-now. He cares nothing about what God has promised him. He wants an immediate satisfaction of his needs. For later he does not care.

Esau is like all those people who serve their belly and not God. His eyes follow his heart. He wants to eat and when he sees “that red stuff there”, he wants it immediately. The lentil stew is like the wine that “is red when it sparkles in the cup” and glides down smoothly, but “at last it bites like a serpent, and stings like a viper” (Pro 23:31-32).

In order not to become prey to the lusts of the flesh, it is necessary that we learn to live in self-judgment. This is only possible by looking at Christ and His work for us on the cross. Only then can we keep ourselves dead to sin (Rom 6:10-12).

For Esau life is short, he doesn’t care what his children will have. He thinks only of himself. The blessings are of no value to him, nor are his parents. He squanders his birthright for immediate pleasure, why he is also called a “godless person” (Heb 12:16).

Esau never repented this godless denial of the birthright. There is no place for this with him (Heb 12:17). Nor did he seek repentance, but blessing. Anyone who repents his sins and goes to God will receive forgiveness. However, Esau did not weep later on because he repented that he sold his birthright, but because he lost the blessings belonging to it. He wept, not because he is a sinner, but because he is a loser. Such tears will be in hell.

In short traits his attitude is described in verse 34: “He ate and drank, and rose and went on his way.” That is his life, like that of more and more people today (1Cor 15:32). There is no room for God. His life is closed for looking upward and focused on what is down on earth. That is the tragedy of many people, especially those who grew up in a family where they heard about God and the Lord Jesus, but consciously rejected it. They have chosen the world and that is their life (Psa 17:14a).
