Isaiah 60

The Holy of Israel

1 - 3 Light breaks through

Isaiah 60-62 summarize the message of Isaiah 58-66. They show us the end result of Israel as the people that the LORD will restore and save in order to show the salvation of God in this world. We clearly see that this salvation is not the result of the work of Israel itself, but of what the LORD works.

As a result of what has just preceded this (Isaiah 58-59), suddenly an encouraging message comes to Zion. For a long time it has remained in darkness and desolation, but the glory of the realm of peace is coming. The new day is coming and “the sun of righteousness” will shine (Mal 4:2). This is also true in the sinner’s life when the light shines in his heart when he hears and obeys the call of the gospel (2Cor 4:4,6).

The light comes to God’s people in the Person of the Messiah (Isa 9:2; 49:6; Jn 1:9). The command “arise” is a word that contains the power to obey (verse 1; cf. Mk 3:5b) and contrasts with their situation as described in the previous chapter (Isa 59:10). Zion must arise from the dust, in which it has lain for so long as in a death sleep, to shine, for her Light, the Giver of light, comes, through which the glory of the LORD rises upon her (cf. Isa 2:5). It speaks of the restoration of Israel to finally be God’s beacon of light, a lighthouse for the nations.

Verse 2 reveals the condition of the nations in their thick darkness that will be there especially when the antichrist reigns. Normally there is little knowledge of God among the nations. Only the eternal power of God in creation is known to them (Rom 1:20). But even that will disappear completely in the years under the reign of the antichrist. Through this man, the antichrist, there will be an unprecedented eclipse about God. This man declares himself to be God (2Thes 2:4; Gen 3:5; Acts 12:21-23). That darkness will remain until the LORD will rise upon His people and His glory will be seen upon them. Then the nations will come to that light (verse 3).

Until the Lord comes to take His church to Himself, the light of the gospel shines in the individual hearts, while the nations are still in darkness. This gospel will not bring all nations to receive the light. Only when Israel is restored the nations will receive the light of God’s testimony and acknowledge the truth about the living God and His Christ. In Psalm 67 we find the prayer of the faithful remnant of Israel: “God be gracious to us and bless us, [and] cause His face to shine upon us— Selah. That Your way may be known on the earth, Your salvation among all nations. Let the peoples praise You, O God” (Psa 67:1b-3a).

4 - 7 Brought to Israel

The nations will not only go up to Jerusalem as the center, but they will also bring back God’s people there from all the countries to which they are scattered (verse 4; Isa 49:22-23). Here it is about the lost ten tribes. These heathen will handle them with care. What the people of Israel will then experience will give them great, moving joy (verse 5). “Thrill and rejoice” is literally “tremble and open wide”. The enormous change in their situation will not only give them immense joy, but also a widening of their hearts to understand the infinite goodness of God.

The national revival of Israel has been promised before (Isa 26:19). We see this also in the vision of the valley with the dry bones (Eze 37:1-14,21-22). There we see that not only the two tribes realm, but also the ten tribes realm will be restored.

The nations will make an effort to provide God’s people with all the riches (verses 5-6). “A multitude of camels”, a symbol of a thriving economy, will be used to bring all that is valuable to Israel. They come “from Sheba”, the land from which a queen once came to visit Solomon, also with “camels carrying spices and very much gold and precious stones” (1Kgs 10:1-2). Just as when Israel carried with them the riches of Egypt at their redemption (Exo 12:35-36), in the future the ten tribes will return laden with the wealth of the nations (verse 5).

The peoples living in the immediate vicinity of Israel will be the first to come to faith. The names mentioned here: Midian, Ephah, Sheba, Kedar and Nebaioth, speak of the Arab countries that are still islamic countries today, but will also come to faith in Christ in the future. They will bring gold, frankincense and flocks in abundance to Israel.

“Gold and frankincense” are also brought as tribute by wise men from the East as representatives of the nations to the Child Jesus when He is born (Mt 2:11). Matthew also mentions myrrh, which is missing here. Myrrh is in place there, because it speaks of the suffering that the born King of the Jews will have to endure at His first coming. But there is no more suffering here, because at His second coming He reigns in glory. Gold speaks of His Divine glory, He is Immanuel (Mt 1:23), God with us. Frankincense speaks of His glory as Man, He is the Man Jesus, Who saves His people from their sins (Mt 1:21).

Yet also in the realm of peace there will always be the remembrance of the work that Christ accomplished on the cross. This is what the great crowd of “flocks” and “rams” speaks of that are given to the people of God to bring an abundance of sacrifices on the altar of the new temple (verse 7). The fragrance of these sacrifices will surround and fill this house and shall “glorify” the “glorious house” of the LORD. These sacrifices will go up “with acceptance” on God’s altar and God shall give His house the greatest splendor and glory.

8 - 16 Nations and Kings Serve Israel

The question in verse 8 might well be realized in the large numbers of passengers arriving in the land with planes in our time. This makes it possible for large numbers of Jews to return to their land in a brief period of time. Yet in our days they are only a foretaste of the great return to the land that will take place after the Lord Jesus has come to earth, defeated the enemies and established His kingdom.

They will also come by ship from far away countries (verse 9). The LORD will signal those lands to let His people go. This will not be by political decisions, but in a conscious act for the honor of the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel. They will provide them with gold and silver. At the same time, the nations will personally help to rebuild the walls of the city (verse 10; cf. Zec 6:15). The help of King Hiram of Tyre in the construction of the temple is a foreshadowing of the help the nations will give in the future in the building of the state of Israel (2Chr 2:3-16).

Everything serves as a proof that the time of anger and discipline is over and that the LORD takes care of them now with pleasure. Therefore, the gates will be constantly open (verse 11), indicating that there is no more evil to fear and that peace has come. The nations will be free to enter in order to pay homage to this people who were so tormented and oppressed at the time (cf. Rev 21:25-26).

Verse 12 shows that God’s judgment during the realm of peace will come on nations that reveal a rebellious spirit and refuse to support Israel (Zec 14:17-19). However, nations that do support Israel will be blessed. A principle that we also see when God blesses Potiphar because of Joseph (Gen 39:5). This proves that it is not yet about the eternal state, but about a state on earth where the Lord Jesus rules and where He directly punishes evil.

In verse 13 in an intermediate sentence the joy of the LORD is mentioned that He has in the prospect of the glory of His sanctuary, the beautiful temple of the realm of peace. He calls it the “place of My feet”, which is the ark in the temple (1Chr 28:2; Psa 99:5; 132:7), indicating that He will dwell there (Exo 25:21-22). It is the place of His rest. The trees of Lebanon, here called “the glory of Lebanon”, will increase the splendor of the temple. Possibly we should think of planting them in the vicinity of the temple, or decorating avenues that lead to the temple.

Then the LORD in verse 14 goes on to talk about the nations from whom they suffered so much in the great tribulation. Now their sons will come and bow down before them. Their fathers will be wiped out by the judgments in the day of the LORD. Also “all those who despised you” will bow down before them. These are the people who did not gather in a direct way against the LORD and His Anointed, but despised God’s people in the time of enmity. These groups will call Jerusalem “the city of the LORD, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel”. What a difference compared to the old days when people looked down on them!

Instead of being abandoned and hated like an unloved woman (cf. Deu 21:15), the LORD will make the city “an everlasting pride, a joy from generation to generation” (verse 15). Joy will pass through the generations. The nations and their kings will make their life force available to this people, just as a mother gives milk to her child (verse 16). Above all, they will no longer be blind, but will know that the LORD is their Savior and the Mighty One of Jacob their Redeemer.

17 - 20 The Glory of the City

Then Israel will be the richest land in the world. The city will be rebuilt with imperishable metals, on which weather and wind will have no influence (verse 17). It is glorious and strong. Life in the city is determined by peace and righteousness. It will be pleasant to live there. Violence and destruction are absent (verse 18). The walls of the city are called “salvation” because the city is impregnable and its inhabitants are perfectly safe. The gates of the city are called “praise” because God will continually glorify His Name there.

Sun and moon will still exist, but will no longer be necessary because of the great radiance that the presence of the LORD in the Shechina, the cloud of the glory in which He dwells, will cause and in which the church is also involved (verses 19-20; cf. Rev 22:5; Mt 17:2; Acts 26:13). This will truly be the victory of light over darkness. In such a state there is no longer room for such things as mourning and sadness. They will flee away to make room for everlasting joy (Isa 35:10). Joy is always experienced more intensely after a period of sorrow and trial.

21 - 22 Everything Is the Work of the LORD

In the realm of peace, the whole people of God on earth are only “righteous” ones (verse 21). The ungodly mass has perished because of the judgments of God. What is left of God’s people are only those who, repenting of their sins, accepted the Messiah. This Israel of God will possess the land permanently.

In the past, Israel never possessed the entire inheritance, not even at the time of Solomon. But now the time has come for God’s promise to Israel to be fulfilled. They are the “branch” planted by the LORD. It is the word that is also used for Christ (Isa 11:1) and therefore indicates the unity of life between the people and their Messiah. They will radiate His glory to His glorification.

The people will bear exuberant fruit and grow into a mighty nation (verse 22). “The smallest one” may mean a person with few or no children. “The least one” may mean the insignificant. The increase in population will also mean an increase in joyful fellowship. When the time comes, all this will happen at great speed. And it will certainly happen, for He, “the LORD”, will do it.
