Numbers 29

The Wilderness Journey

Introduction

The second series of three feasts are celebrated in the second half of the year. The offerings on the occasion of those feasts are all brought in the seventh month. Just like the feasts of the first series belong together in a special way, the feasts of the second series also belong together in a special way. The first series is mainly of application to the church, the second series has particular significance with regard to Israel.

On the Feast of blowing of trumpets on the first day (verses 1-6) and on the day of atonement on the tenth day (verses 7-11) are offered as offerings added to the other offerings to be made on that day:

1. one bull for a burnt offering and

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah,

2. one ram for a burnt offering; and

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: two-tenths of an ephah,

3. seven male lambs one year old without defect for a burnt offering and per lamb

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: one-tenth of an ephah and

4. one male goat for a sin offering.

On the Feast of Booths from the fifteenth to the twenty-second day (verses 12-38) are brought on the first day, together with the other sacrifices prescribed for that day:

1. thirteen bulls and per bull

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah

2. two rams and per ram

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: two-tenths of an ephah

3. fourteen male lambs one year old without defect and per lamb

a grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: one-tenths of an ephah

4. one male goat for a sin offering

These offerings are also made on the second to the seventh day of the feast. However, there is one exception: every day one bull less is sacrificed.

1 - 6 Offerings on the Feast of Blowing Trumpets

1 ‘Now in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall also have a holy convocation; you shall do no laborious work. It will be to you a day for blowing trumpets.
2 You shall offer a burnt offering as a soothing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, [and] seven male lambs one year old without defect;
3 also their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths [of an ephah] for the bull, two-tenths for the ram,
4 and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs.
5 [Offer] one male goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you,
6 besides the burnt offering of the new moon and its grain offering, and the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings, according to their ordinance, for a soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD.

The feasts of this chapter speak to us of what God will do with Israel. It all starts with the Feast of blowing trumpets. We live in the end time, where God will start again with Israel. We can observe the signs. We live in a spiritual sense at the end of the wilderness journey of the Christian church on earth. We could perhaps say that this period began with the sound of the call: “Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet [him]” (Mt 25:6b). We can see this as the forerunner of the Feast of blowing trumpets.

When the Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, has come for the church and has taken her from the earth, He will again occupy Himself with Israel as His people on earth. He will be able to do this on the basis of His sacrifice. His sacrifice is multifaceted. This versatility is reflected in the various types of offerings brought here. When telling the Father about Who the Lord Jesus is for His heart, it is good to remember His purposes regarding Israel.

7 - 11 Offerings on the Day of Atonement

7 ‘Then on the tenth day of this seventh month you shall have a holy convocation, and you shall humble yourselves; you shall not do any work.
8 You shall present a burnt offering to the LORD [as] a soothing aroma: one bull, one ram, seven male lambs one year old, having them without defect;
9 and their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths [of an ephah] for the bull, two-tenths for the one ram,
10 a tenth for each of the seven lambs;
11 one male goat for a sin offering, besides the sin offering of atonement and the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.

The day of atonement expresses the first effect of God’s renewed dealings with His earthly people. There will take place a great humiliation among the people, confession of the sins with which they have provoked God. It concerns the sins of idolatry and the rejection of the Lord Jesus. When they look on Him, they will come to a great general and also individual grief (Rev 1:7; Zec 12:10-14).

This will lead to an abundance of offerings being brought. The depth of the awareness of sin works a deep and great admiration for the Lord Jesus. That is seen in the picture here. On the day of atonement, no less than thirteen burnt offerings are brought. In Leviticus 16 the sin offering is in the foreground, here it is especially the burnt offering.

12 - 38 Offerings on the Feast of Booths

12 ‘Then on the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no laborious work, and you shall observe a feast to the LORD for seven days.
13 You shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire as a soothing aroma to the LORD: thirteen bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old, which are without defect;
14 and their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths [of an ephah] for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths for each of the two rams,
15 and a tenth for each of the fourteen lambs;
16 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offering.
17 ‘Then on the second day: twelve bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
18 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
19 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.
20 ‘Then on the third day: eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
21 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
22 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.
23 ‘Then on the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
24 their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
25 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offering.
26 ‘Then on the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
27 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
28 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.
29 ‘Then on the sixth day: eight bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
30 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
31 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offerings.
32 ‘Then on the seventh day: seven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without defect;
33 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
34 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offering.
35 ‘On the eighth day you shall have a solemn assembly; you shall do no laborious work.
36 But you shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire, as a soothing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, seven male lambs one year old without defect;
37 their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bull, for the ram and for the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance;
38 and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.

The previous offerings already bear witness to abundance. On the occasion of this last feast, a tidal wave of offerings is added, as it were. It therefore represents the exuberant praise that will be brought to God during the kingdom of peace of which this feast speaks. We find this exuberance for example in the last psalms of the book of Psalms.

The Feast of Booths lasts seven days, which means a perfect or completed period. Like the sabbath, this feast refers to the kingdom of peace. The feast starts with thirteen bulls. This is one less than the number of fourteen that speaks of double perfection or completion, for the knowledge of Christ does not reach that perfection even in the realm of peace. Even at this feast we see in the picture of the diminishing number of offerings that the appreciation of Christ’s sacrifice will diminish as the time of the kingdom of peace passes. But the diminishing goes no further than until seven bulls on the seventh day (verse 32). Although the appreciation diminishes, the perfect value – of which the number seven speaks – of the work itself remains in the attention.

We see this phenomenon of diminishing appreciation also in the history of the church which is prophetically presented to us in Revelation 2-3. It begins with leaving the first love in the message to the church in Ephesus (Rev 2:4) and ends with disgusting lukewarmness in the message to the church in Laodicea (Rev 3:16).

However, there is still an eighth day (verse 35). This speaks of a new beginning and also of a beginning without an end. The period of the empire of peace is followed by eternity. There everything is new and without end. On that day, too, the prescribed offerings must be brought. Everything that is of God, whether in time or for eternity, is exclusively based on the work of the Lord Jesus.

On the eighth day the same offerings are brought as on the day of atonement. The great atonement made by the Lord Jesus on the cross remains forever the certain basis of all that we enjoy there continually, without interruption and perfectly (Heb 9:12; 10:14).

With all the fullness that is present at all feasts and especially at the Feast of Booths, the sin offering does not fail. This shows that, no matter how blessed we are with all that Christ’s work has effected for us, we will always remember what has been necessary for our sins. We will never forget that His work has also been necessary for the cleansing of our sins: “For he who lacks these [qualities] is blind [or] short-sighted, having forgotten [his] purification from his former sins” (2Pet 1:9).

39 - 40 Ratification of the Foregoing

39 ‘You shall present these to the LORD at your appointed times, besides your votive offerings and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings and for your grain offerings and for your drink offerings and for your peace offerings.’”
40 Moses spoke to the sons of Israel in accordance with all that the LORD had commanded Moses.

God gives here the ratification of the foregoing. He also mentions that the regulations given do not affect the voluntariness of other offerings. He is entitled to our worship. That is justified. He also seeks hearts that approach Him in voluntary worship, as the Lord Jesus says: “For such people the Father seeks to be His worshipers” (Jn 4:23).

We see such a mind among the people of Israel in the days of King Josiah: “Then the whole assembly decided to celebrate [the feast] another seven days, so they celebrated the seven days with joy” (2Chr 30:23). After the obligatory celebration of the Feast of Booths, another seven days of celebration is added with a voluntary heart.
