Esther 10

The Providence of God

1 - 3 The Greatness of Mordecai

The power of the king is shown by the fact that he can impose taxes on all areas of his kingdom, even the most hard-to-reach parts of it (verse 1). He is the undisputed ruler to whom each one is obliged to give what he asks. “All the accomplishments of his authority and strength” are “written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia” (verse 2). What gets special mention in the Book of the Chronicles is “the full account of the greatness of Mordecai to which the king advanced him”.

The reason for this is Mordecai’s place in the realm of this mighty and great ruler. For “Mordecai the Jew” is in that realm “second [only] to King Ahasuerus” (verse 3). Mordecai holds the highest office in the realm. He is second in rank after the king, which is also the case with Joseph, who is second after Pharaoh (Gen 41:40-44). Like Mordecai, Joseph is the savior and protector of the people.

He holds his high office in a way that makes him “great among the Jews“ and through which he is “in favor with his many kinsmen”. Indeed, he is constantly seeking “the good of his people“ and speaking “for the welfare of his whole nation”. He is working for them in such a way that his work is also of use to his offspring.

In this last chapter we clearly see Ahasuerus again as a picture of God and Mordecai as a picture of the Lord Jesus. In the greatness of the king we see the greatness of God. Just as the greatness of the king is expressed in the greatness of Mordecai, so the greatness of God is expressed in the Lord Jesus.

Prophetically we see here a picture of the glorious reign of God and His Christ in the realm of peace. The realm of peace begins after the return of the Lord Jesus to redeem His people and destroy their enemies. Christ’s reign is not limited to Israel, but extends to the ends of the earth, the distant and isolated “coastlands of the sea”.

To the Lord Jesus “all authority has been given” by God (Mt 28:18). In turn, Christ works through His power that glory and honor be given to the triune God throughout the earth. God gives the dominion over His kingdom into the hands of the Lord Jesus as the Son of man (Dan 7:13-14). After His millennial reign of peace, Christ gives the kingdom back into the hands of God (1Cor 15:24-28).

Christ will reign, but He does so in the Name of God the Father (cf. Eph 5:5; Rev 11:15). He, Who Himself is the eternal Son, is as the Son of man subject to God, He is the second. The kingdom is the kingdom of God, but God has subdued it all under the feet of the Son of man (Heb 2:8). The Father has also given “Him authority to execute judgment, because He is [the] Son of Man” (Jn 5:27).

Christ will be respected by the Jews during His reign, as Mordecai is here, for they realize that they owe their salvation to Him. Their outward position is not the greatest, but their lives. They love Him, for He concerned Himself with their fate and has become like them. He calls them His brethren; for that He is not ashamed (Heb 2:11). He is the true Asher, of whom Moses says: “May he be favored by his brothers” (Deu 33:24).

He seeks the good for His people. He does everything to please them. This is an example for us. Are we seeking the good for our brothers and sisters? If we seek our own interests and not the interests of the Lord Jesus, their interests disappear from our eyes and hearts (cf. Phil 2:20-21).

Also in His speaking He is focused on blessing His people. His speaking is not only directed to His people here and now, but also to those who will come in the future. That is what makes His speech so reliable. His Word is for all times. He directs Himself in His speaking both to God and to His people. He speaks to God for His own in view of their life on earth (Rom 8:34). He also speaks to His people that in listening to Him they may receive blessing. Psalm 119 is one great song of praise on the speaking of God and the blessed consequences of listening to Him.

The book does not end with the death of Mordecai, but with a man at the height of power and glory, a man of great stature and great power, while constantly concerned with the welfare of his people. He is one and all activity. He remains in our memory as someone who lives on forever.

The Lord Jesus did indeed pass through death, but became alive for all eternity. He remains for all eternity and is constantly busy for His people: “Because He continues forever, holds His priesthood permanently. Therefore, He is able also to save forever those who draw near to God through Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them” (Heb 7:24-25).

In the way Mordecai has gone, we see the truth of the word that “the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn, that shines brighter and brighter until the full day” (Pro 4:18). He has gone the path of the righteous and has reached the full day of glory. This is already the case for the Lord Jesus in glory and will be seen by everyone on His return to earth. Then the full day has come without clouds and He shines like the Sun of righteousness.
